Contents
Introduction
1. Designer and Filmmaker 33
2. Film Titles: Theory and Practice 71
3. Creating a Mood: Pars pro toto 129
4. Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views 191
5. The Urban Landscape 227
6. Journeys of Discovery: Seeing Is Knowledge 265
7. Civilization: Organizing Knowledge through
Communication 305
Acknowledgments 357
Filmography 361
Notes 369
Selected Bibliography 421
Index 441

Introduction
or pen on any particular design. Such an approach demands a high degree
of cross-disciplinary analysis, which is why the present project is structured neither chronologically nor by medium; instead, it attributes formal
and intellectual commonalities to the Bass brand across media.
The morning after the Oscars, Bass arrived late at the Saul Bass &
Associates office on La Brea. The staff had gathered to congratulate the
boss and themselves on their success, which, it was hoped, would move
Bass’s filmmaking career to a new level. Bass noticed that Art Goodman,
his right-hand man for more than ten years, was signing reproductions of
sketches for staff members, since he had drawn the “Edifice” animation
sequence for Why Man Creates. Saul took his trusted designer aside and
told him that he couldn’t sign his own name to the sketches: he worked
for Bass, and only Bass was allowed to sign artwork.5 A day later, an anonymous cartoon of Bass with his Oscar and Moses’ tablets appeared in the
office, probably drawn by Goodman. Bass is shown saying, “Voice of
whom?” implying that even God had to make an appointment. Goodman, who was as mild-mannered as they come, worked for almost forty
years in the Bass office. Bass was the front man for some of Goodman’s
best work, but Art never complained about the slight.
Indeed, even though Bass was known to be a screamer, there were
few fights between Bass and Goodman, because Art always deferred to
Saul as the head of the design studio. That’s the way it was. This was not
Hollywood per se, where one’s last credit was often the only way to get
one’s next job. This was an American commercial design studio, where it
was common practice for only the head designer to sign the work. A British designer-filmmaker who worked briefly for Bass noted that he was
shocked by the practice until he realized that’s the way it was in America.6
Bass had his reasons for insisting on a Los Angeles street address for the
office, which was nominally in “Hollywood.” He always thought of himself as a designer with interests far beyond the film community. And Bass
was nothing if not a master at creating and controlling his own brand. It
was the key to his success.
In terms of his movie titles, Bass has been acknowledged to the point
of cliché as the master innovator. Even in the twenty-first century, filmmakers and title designers pay homage to Bass’s achievements. For example, producer Matthew Weiner’s opening credits for the cable television
series Mad Men, about a Madison Avenue advertising firm in the 1960s,
is a specific tribute to Bass and North by Northwest (with a little Casino

5

SAUL BASS
thrown in). As noted by Steve Fuller, creative director for Imaginary
Force, the firm that designed the title sequence: “I’m a huge Saul Bass fan
. . . I like to think that it’s kind of an update of Saul Bass.”7 New York title
designer Peter Himmelstein suggests that title designers study “every title
sequence Saul Bass ever did” to educate themselves about the medium’s
history: “Bass had this integrity of design from project to project, regardless of theme or content.”8 Likewise, Ty Mattson’s titles for season 8 of
the television series Dexter are another homage to Bass: “The poster series
that I created for Dexter was inspired by mid-century modern design and
particularly the work of Saul Bass.”9 Mattson actually “borrows” an almost
exact replica of the disembodied hand from the titles to Bass’s The Facts of
Life (1960). Other modern film titles influenced by Bass include Ed Wood
(1994, Tim Burton), Se7en (1995, David Fincher), Bad Education (2004,
Pedro Almovodar), Kiss Kiss Bang Bang (2005, Shane Black), The Kingdom (2007, PIC Agency [Pamela Green, Jarik Van Sluijs]), Zombies, Zombies, Zombies . . . (2008, Jason Murphy), and Argo (2012, Ben Affleck), to
name only a few. Kyle Cooper, who has been called the new Saul Bass of
movie titles, created titles for Se7en, The Island of Dr. Moreau (1996, John
Frankenheimer), and Donnie Brasco (1997, Mike Newell), among more
than seventy others.10 Like Bass, Cooper insists that title sequences are an
integral part of the movie.11 For Catch Me If You Can (2002, Steven
Spielberg), the French design firm Kuntzel & Deygas created another
specific homage to Bass; the film, like Mad Men, takes place in the early
1960s, when Bass was at the top of his game. Modern title designers have
a huge technical advantage over Bass, however; they can use digital tools
to create many of the effects Bass had to create painstakingly in the analog
era.
Posters also reflect Bass’s influence. For instance, Sidney Lumet’s
Before the Devil Knows You’re Dead (2007) was designed by the Los Angeles–based advertising agency Coldopen after producer Mark Urman told
Lumet he wanted “something Saul Bass-y . . . something simple and
strong with lots of room for review quotes.”12 Another recent poster that
riffed on Bass is A Huey P. Newton Story (2001, Spike Lee), designed by
Art Sims; earlier, Sims had “plagiarized” the Anatomy of a Murder poster
for Spike Lee’s Clockers (1995). Other posters that play with the Bass style
include Burn after Reading (2008, Ethan and Joel Cohen), designed by
P+A/Mojo; In the Loop (2009, Armando Iannucci), designed by Crew
Creative Advertising; Precious (2009, Lee Daniels) and Buried (2010,

6

Introduction
Rodrigo Cortés), both designed by Ignition Print; and, most recently, the

pre-release poster for Django Unchained (2012, Quentin Tarantino),
designed by BLT Communications. These random selections attest not
only to the longevity and distinctiveness of the Bass brand but also to the
fact that twenty-first-century Hollywood design firms have embraced that
style when it suits their purposes.
Given his multidimensional talents and unique ability to bring
together high art and commercialism, Bass represents a long-standing
reality in the Hollywood industry—namely, that artists fight for aesthetic
issues and sometimes actually succeed, thereby establishing their independence, or, when they lose, they compromise and salvage what they can. In
the case of Bass, this meant either signing his name to the work or taking
his name off the design, but getting paid and working steadily nevertheless. Bass often accompanied his signature with a stamp of the Bass logo:
a fish (a bass) with the designer’s physiognomy. It is both a playful and a
literal image (designed by Don Weller). Bass became Hollywood’s most
prominent designer precisely because he jealously guarded his brand—a
brand so tied up with his own personality that Bass/Yager & Associates
was not sustainable after the designer’s demise.

Creating Saul Bass
In interviews, Saul Bass liked to say, “I always knew I was going to be
Saul Bass, commercial artist.”13 But what did that mean, and how did it
work? In an article on creativity, Bass related a funny anecdote about his
Jewish mother, who asked him what he did for a living. She, like most
laypersons, had little concept of what commercial design work entailed.
Bass showed his mother an advertisement he had designed and explained
that he had done neither the photography nor the typography, which
confused her. Finally, he said, “Well, you see, I conceive the whole thing,
and then I get all these people together and get them to carry out the
process.” His mother responded, “Oh—you devil!”14 In other words, a
designer didn’t necessarily create an actual advertisement or brochure or
billboard or logo; he or she created the concepts and then assigned others to physically carry out the tasks. A design office might have many
designers and technicians working in it, but at its head was the designer
whose name was on the door. It was that individual who conceptualized
ideas, talked to clients, approved designs, and established the firm’s iden-

7

SAUL BASS
tity. Designer Lorraine Wild has connected this strategy to the post–
World War II movement of young American modernist designers, trained
mostly by German Jewish émigré designers-artists from the Bauhaus, to
legitimize their work in the commercial arena of American capital: “They
found that a most efficient way to connect to their clients as consultants
was to tie their own identity as artists and individual creators (or ‘stars’)
to the work that they produced. Like movie stars or famous artists (figures more easily understood by commercial/popular culture), their work
was increasingly championed on the basis of personal authorship (even if
the work was actually the product of a 30-person office), rather than for
its merits.”15
In other words, no matter how many designers worked for Bass, he
was the controlling intelligence who defined the look and the brand,
because clients insisted on star quality. A consistent brand not only guaranteed quality, as far as clients were concerned, but also allowed them to
know exactly what they were paying for. Individual designers could make
significant contributions, but they worked for the firm. Bass himself
explained his design team as follows: “So it’s not ‘Saul Bass & Associates’
like a company, but Saul Bass and his associates . . . I have a whole group
of guys who are all up to our ass in all kinds of interesting things.”16 Or,
as an unpublished official biography put it: “Rather than trying to be a
never-diminishing font of symbols, a kind of superhuman Trademark
Man, Bass shares the creative doodling with a bullpen of designers, acting as a combination competitor, editor, nudge, shaman, gadfly, guru
and fearless leader. His success as an inspiration and constructive arbiter
of the ideas of others is almost as important to the trail of trademarks he
has laid down over the years as is his own originality.”17
Bass utilized a ruthless process of elimination, whittling down possibilities and always keeping his eyes on the prize, which was to produce a
consistent product that met the client’s needs. Art Goodman characterized the collaborative process similarly: “A lot of what ifs, out of which
Bass will eventually coax a solution. No matter how nutty an idea may
sound, Saul encourages people to say it. To me Saul has always been a true
editor. He can find something that others don’t see.”18 Arnold Schwartzman described the process as designers throwing out ideas until Bass
decided, “Let’s work on that.”19 Another employee who worked for Bass
in the 1960s, Mike Lonzo, noted that Bass could be completely oblivious
to others when he worked, even if they were contributing ideas. He was

8

Introduction
obsessive about work, and although he could be extremely generous on a
personal level, he rarely thanked anyone for their design work. As far as he
was concerned, it was their job.20 Bass usually worked until late at night,
and staff members were expected to do the same. Although he considered
Bass a mentor and a friend, Schwartzman left the office after only six
months because he couldn’t work through the night, as Saul required.21
Designing at Saul Bass & Associates did not occur only during normal
business hours. As Bass himself noted, creativity “cannot operate from
nine to five every day and not at any other time.”22
Bass’s own office was meticulously neat, filled with armies of ancient
stone figures and animal fetishes, organized like a mini–museum exhibit; his
awards, including the Oscar; and examples of his work and family photographs hanging on the wall. The rooms were usually kept at near-frigid temperatures, whether winter or summer, because Bass thought if it was too
warm, the staff might be lulled to sleep. If anyone complained about the
temperature, Bass would throw him or her a sweater from a pile in the corner.23 Many of Bass’s employees remember him fondly as a friendly and brilliant raconteur, but also as a nervous nail-biter and an occasional screamer.
Not surprisingly, most designers eventually left to set up their own design
firms if they had any ambition, the exception being Art Goodman.
Goodman, despite being an unbelievably talented designer, stayed
because he felt comfortable. Both he and Bass were former New Yorkers
who shared a Jewish upbringing and sense of humor, and they often
played practical jokes on each other. Both loved pre-Columbian and
other forms of “primitive” art, and they undoubtedly shared a common
design aesthetic. Goodman treated Bass like a father figure, while Bass
treated Goodman like a brother. Goodman worked on numerous corporate identity and packaging campaigns and developed many of the
logos that Bass became famous for; he also drew movie and event posters. Because Bass’s hand was apparently unsteady, Goodman prepared
many of the final storyboards for Bass’s animated titles and films.
According to designer Mamoru Shimokochi, “Art’s drawings were
unique and extraordinary, always characterized by humor and a strong
simple message.”24
When he first moved to Los Angeles after World War II, Goodman
worked for Hal Friedman and then opened his own office. Goodman
joined Bass’s firm initially as a freelancer and then as a full-time designer—
at less pay than he had been making. The advantage for Goodman was

9

SAUL BASS
that he didn’t have to run his own office; he was uncomfortable with the
business, hustling side of design work. Naturally shy and reticent, and selfconscious about a war wound that had crippled his writing hand, Goodman would get stage fright with clients.25 Bass, in contrast, was a master
at communicating ideas to clients and could sell them almost anything.
Lou Dorfsman, a longtime friend and colleague, was in awe of Bass’s ability to make the pitch. This is how he described Bass’s conversation with
Kodak executives during the planning stages of the 1964 New York
World’s Fair:
Saul and Will Burtin—a superb thinker and designer—were
both working for Eastman Kodak projects. Burtin gave a presentation of what he was planning, and there was a big yawn
from the board of directors. . . . He talked in highly abstracted
aesthetical and philosophical terms. Then Saul came on with
the kind of know-how that moves people—Americans. He was
talking about the cash register. He was talking about aesthetics
and beauty—and the cash register! The cash register they all
understood, and they lit up. I watched Saul at work, and I
learned more from watching him: I know how to talk to CEOs
and presidents of companies because of my observations of
Saul at work. He was fabulous, so convincing. Those people
could hear the cash register ringing from the sales of film—and
Saul got through.26
After Herb Yager joined the firm, he became a major force in the
company, not only finding new clients but also paying attention to the
bottom line; he managed the corporate design work, ensuring that certain
standards of quality were maintained, even on smaller projects that did
not necessarily warrant Bass’s valuable time. Yager had previously worked
for Carson Roberts, but when that firm was bought by Ogilvy Public
Relations, Yager was forced to look for new opportunities. A friend of his
had interviewed for the job of business manager with Bass, but when he
learned what the salary was, he declined and recommended Yager. During
their interview, he and Bass discovered that they had attended the same
elementary, middle, and high schools in the Bronx, only fifteen years
apart. It was as if Yager were already family. Yager agreed to take the salary
but proposed that after a year’s probation, he would become a co-owner

10

Introduction
of the firm. Bass reacted with a comment about chutzpah, but Yager said
that in a year’s time, Bass could decide—yes or no, in or out.27 Yager must
have significantly increased revenue, because the firm’s name was soon
changed to Bass/Yager & Associates. Thereafter, Yager kept the firm
profitable, even if it meant subsidizing Bass’s filmmaking with corporate
design work.
Another important personality in the Bass office, especially in the
1980s and at the end of Bass’s career, was his second wife, Elaine Makatura. When she was hired as a secretary, Bass was still married, but she
soon won his heart. In the late 1970s she became a steady collaborator on
films and film title work and actually received codirector credit with Bass,
although she was never involved in any of the graphic design and identity
campaign work that constituted the center of the business.28 Their fights
in the 1980s were legendary, although they perceived the bickering as
part of the creative process.29 Indeed, by the 1990s, when Bass was becoming fragile, Elaine Bass moved into a position of greater authority and may
have taken the lead on later titles such as Age of Innocence, Mr. Saturday
Night, and Cape Fear. She brought a level of feminine sensuousness and
tactility to the Bass brand that had previously been absent. Saul was all
geometry, whereas Elaine introduced curves and undulations, like the
glistening water’s surface in Cape Fear, as well as long takes that contrasted with Bass’s montage technique.
Some argue that Elaine’s contributions to Saul’s work from the 1960s
onward cannot be underestimated and that in some cases she was responsible for the product.30 The creative relationship between husband and
wife has been characterized as equal to that of Ray and Charles Eames, a
comparison that former employees in the Bass office have described as
overstated. It seems doubtful that, in her position as an assistant, Elaine
would have had much influence on design decisions in the early years, and
later she was present at the office only intermittently, having taken on the
responsibility of raising their two children.31 Not that there aren’t traces
of Elaine, even early on. In the credits of West Side Story, Bass inserted the
initials “SB-EM,” barely visible on a wall of graffiti, but took sole credit
for the title work. A Bass office press release from 1979 notes that Elaine
assisted on the titles for West Side Story and Walk on the Wild Side and on
the films From Here to There and The Searching Eye.32 Once the children
were older and required less attention, “she felt there was more time available to devote to filmmaking and returned to more active involvement.”33

11

SAUL BASS
According to a staff member who worked in the office in the late 1970s,
Elaine continually pressed Saul for full credit on film work, which may
explain why the 35mm theatrical release of The Solar Film credits only
Bass as director, whereas the Pyramid nontheatrical version released later
credits both of them.
However, until the late 1970s, Bass never mentioned his wife as an
equal collaborator in any published interviews. Elaine’s name did not
come up in Bass’s 1978 interview film, Bass on Titles, nor in an American
Film Institute (AFI) seminar in May 1979, despite the fact that the subject of the seminar was filmmaking.34 According to Owen Edwards, who
interviewed Bass extensively for a book in the late 1980s, he never sensed
that Elaine was important to the office’s design work; nor was she present
at the interviews, other than to serve tea.35 Furthermore, in the estate collection, there are no surviving staff photographs of Elaine. In a 1980
interview, however, Bass acknowledged: “That is why my collaboration
with my wife Elaine in the film work is so important to me. She is the only
person that I completely trust in terms of her judgment, and her sense of
appropriateness—and this has been tested over a long period of time.”36
Indeed, after 1979, Bass more consistently mentioned Elaine in connection with their film work, but the corporate identity and design work
remained Saul’s exclusive purview. This is substantiated in an unpublished
official biography from 1993, which quotes Saul: “Elaine is not an aggressive, confrontational person, while that sort of thing is very easy for me on
a movie set. So we have an understanding when we’re shooting. I tend to
be the mouthpiece, I’ve got the loud voice, and if there’s any yelling to do
I’m the one who does it.”37
It seems clear that, given his relationship with his other designers
(even Art Goodman), Saul Bass never relinquished artistic control because
he was protecting his brand. As Yager conceded, Bass had great difficulty
sharing credit with any of his designers, including his wife. Until the late
1970s, Elaine Bass’s contributions in the film arena must therefore be
considered in the same light as those of all the other designers who worked
in the Bass office and never received credit, even if her actual influence as
a sounding board was not insubstantial. After 1979 the Bass brand, at
least in the filmmaking arena, evolved into “Saul & Elaine Bass.” This
book therefore attributes credit to “Saul Bass” not as the biological and
biographical individual but as a design entity, a consistent brand, a label.
The number of employees in Bass’s design office fluctuated, depending

12

Introduction
on the work, but he may have employed as many as forty individuals at
any one time, none of whom received credit.

Branding Saul Bass
After Bass moved to the West Coast in 1946, he quickly learned that
relentless self-promotion was not only the rule in Hollywood; it was also
a necessary survival skill. If Bass wanted to create a design brand that
appealed to Hollywood’s self-styled artistic elite, he needed to constantly
market himself and his office. Such promotion included a show reel that
had to be kept up-to-date for potential clients, press releases, attendance
at design conferences and lectures, continuous submissions for Art Directors Club awards, occasional articles authored by the designer, and, most
important, articles about Bass by “objective” third parties. One staff
member in the Bass office was responsible for promptly sending out photo
materials requested by journalists, magazine editors, and clients. Sample
reels also kept changing, depending on Bass’s latest work and on the
evolving master narrative of his career.38 Even in his own films, Bass promoted his own work. For example, in a 1969 AT&T corporate film, he
used his own Continental, Westinghouse, and other Bass-designed corporate logos to illustrate points he was making about good logo design, in
an attempt to sell his new corporate identity campaign to the rank and file.
Indeed, much of the published work on Saul Bass was orchestrated to
some degree by Bass himself through interviews, visual materials, his own
essays, and company public relations materials. In this way, Bass maintained the integrity of the brand while creating an official Saul Bass biography and mythology.
Bass’s success in keeping his name in the public eye is illustrated by
the sheer number of articles about him in the highbrow design and art
press. Profiles of Bass began to appear in the early 1950s and provided a
level of legitimacy, class, and visibility that he required to attract corporate
and Hollywood clients. Between 1954 and his passing in 1996, more than
sixty-five articles or profiles on Bass, almost always including quotes from
the designer, were published in European, Japanese, and American design
and art journals such as Communication Arts, Design Week, Graphis,
IDEA, Industrial Design, Gebrauchsgraphik, and Print. Since the 1920s,
foreign art journals such as the Berlin-based Gebrauchsgraphik had not
only propagated Bauhaus art and design principles to the American design

13

SAUL BASS
community (it included English translations) but also enhanced the
respectability of commercial art, a fact not lost on Bass.39 Even an informal
survey of these art journals indicates that few, if any, other American
designers received as much attention as Bass did.
As early as November 1948, Bass published a cover design for the
prestigious journal Arts & Architecture. In a blurb accompanying and
explaining his contribution, Bass wrote: “Man’s conflicts are expressed by
the confusion and indirection of the background against which is projected the highly integrated nature-machine, the egg; a symbol not only
of order but also of purposeful growth.”40 It might as well have been a
manifesto for the evolving Bass brand: keep the design simple, utilize geometric forms, and don’t overload the background with information that
becomes only “noise.” In 1953 Bass published a short, heavily illustrated
article on movie advertising in the Swiss design journal Graphis,41 which
would become one of his biggest supporters. Founded in 1944, the trilingual (English, German, and French) journal was a Bass stronghold for
decades; it published more than fifteen Bass-themed articles, including
what were essentially promotion pieces on Bass written by Yager and
Bass’s friend Henry Wolf.42 In 1954, two years after going independent,
Bass was profiled in the storied journal American Artist. The author
emphasized the designer’s high aesthetic aspirations, even when working
for hire: “For him there is no conflict of ‘commercial’ vs. ‘fine art.’ He has
simply chosen an area of activity which enables him to communicate with
many, rather than with a few.”43 Three years later, in a lengthy article on
West Coast designers, Industrial Design highlighted Bass, writing:
“Equally at home in the abstract world of ideas and the tangible world of
the eye, Saul Bass has become an undisputed leader in the western graphics world with work that is fresh, lithe, charming.”44 What is most striking
in these articles is the degree to which Bass is positioned as something
more than a commercialist. Like the field of design as a whole, which in
post–World War II America was demanding academic respectability, Bass
was consistently stylized as an intellectual, a thinker, and an artist.
Bass was getting this kind of attention not only because of the quality
and originality of his work but also because he had been busy establishing
contacts in the field. In particular, his involvement in the Art Directors
Clubs of New York and Los Angeles made the field take notice. Bass won
his first New York Art Directors Club award in 1945 for an advertisement
for Tylon Cold Wave, which he may have produced as a class assignment

14

Introduction
in Gyorgy Kepes’s design seminar at Brooklyn College. Through the New
York club, Bass later made contact with modernist designers Herbert
Bayer, Alexey Brodovitch, Will Burtin, Herbert Matter, and Paul Rand.45
From 1948 until 1962, examples of Bass designs—whether produced for
commercial or movie clients—appeared year after year in the New York
club’s Annual of Advertising and Editorial Art and Design. In 1949 Bass
was involved in a serious car accident on the way to the Los Angeles Art
Directors Club awards ceremony, where he was to receive a gold medal
and two certificates of merit.46 Over the next ten years, Bass would win
dozens of awards from Art Directors Clubs in New York, Cleveland, Chicago, and Los Angeles. In 1981 he won the prestigious AIGA Medal “in
recognition of his exceptional achievements in the field of design.”47
Meanwhile, Bass also became involved in the International Design
Conference in Aspen (IDCA), joining its program committee in 1953.
The conference had been founded in 1951 by Walter Paepcke of Container Corporation of America, the most high-profile supporter of modernist design among America’s corporate CEOs; Paepcke had underwritten
Moholy-Nagy’s New Bauhaus School in Chicago in 1938. The conference’s stated goal was to bring designers and business leaders together to
discuss the value of good design, but also to make contacts. Bass was a
featured speaker at the 1954 conference, when the topic was “Planning:
The Basis of Design”; other speakers included Richard Neutra, Russell
Lynes, Burns W. Roper, Edgardo Contini, and Robert Saudek.48 Bass
attended the conference virtually every year until his death, becoming one
of the éminences grises of Aspen, whether as a speaker or as a filmmaker
presenting his work at the Wheeler Opera House at evening screenings.
By the 1970s, he was a longtime member of the IDCA’s Board of Directors, and he sometimes conducted workshops at the conference. For
example, at his 1991 workshop titled “Bare Bones Filmmaking,” his students produced a spoof of the ape sequence in Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A
Space Odyssey.49 In 1996, two months after his death, the IDCA (which
was focusing on the history of German design that year) organized a tribute for Bass.50
In reference to his film work in Hollywood, Bass took pains to remain
visible in industry trade journals, sending notes to Variety about his activities. After 1956 and the success of The Man with the Golden Arm, Bass
became a vocal proponent of what Variety termed “the avant-garde
approach to film ad and title design.”51 Never shy, Bass had no qualms

15

SAUL BASS
about attacking conservative distributors, exhibitors, or heads of studio
publicity departments for their reluctance to try anything new. By the
1960s, Bass’s name and illustrations of his work were also appearing in
film journals. The designer’s business strategy in Hollywood was to create
something new that would make waves in the trades but could be marketed again and again, establishing an iconic Bass brand. In other words,
there was a constant push and pull with the film industry—attacking when
strong, then compromising. In this regard, it is interesting to examine
which images Bass chose when sending out samples of his work to
journalists.
His most published work by far, whether in art journals or film magazines, came from The Man with the Golden Arm; examples of the poster
or titles appeared in at least sixty publications.52 This makes sense, given
that Bass dated the beginning of his Hollywood career with this film by
Otto Preminger, despite the fact that he had already designed a number
of titles and had already worked in movie industry advertising for eighteen years. Title stills or posters from Anatomy of a Murder, Bonjour
Tristesse, and Exodus—all of them Preminger films—were also popular,
appearing in more than thirty publications. The inclusion of Bonjour
Tristesse is a bit surprising, given the film’s failure at the box office, but
of course, Bass’s association with the famous producer-director and with
a well-known French novel added to his own prominence. Preminger
was considered serious and highbrow by the industry and the press.
Indeed, illustrations from all the Preminger titles Bass worked on,
including Saint Joan, The Cardinal, Bunny Lake Is Missing, and Advise
and Consent, were published at least ten times. Surprisingly, Alfred
Hitchcock’s North by Northwest merited fewer than five published illustrations, while Psycho was seen in at least twenty publications and Vertigo
in twenty-five or more. Only four other films (not including Bass’s own
films Why Man Creates and Phase IV) achieved double digits in terms of
frequency of publication: Storm Center, West Side Story, Spartacus, and
Walk on the Wild Side. The number of illustrations for his other film
work falls off dramatically, seemingly based on Bass’s submission of
whatever he happened to have finished at the moment, rather than on
an attempt to build the Bass brand. Once he was established as a title
designer, Bass stopped sending samples of his movie advertisements
from before 1956, including his first poster for Carmen Jones, possibly
because he felt the Bass brand was not pure enough in this early work.

16

Introduction
Thus, Bass supplied the same images to countless publications in an
effort to establish his brand, while simultaneously attaching his name to
films and directors who were considered legitimate auteurs, with Preminger trumping Hitchcock in this regard.53
The centrality of The Man with the Golden Arm to the Bass brand is
connected to the construction of what might be termed the official biographical narrative of Saul Bass. In countless interviews, Bass claimed that
before his work on that film, he had previously worked only as a graphic
designer. After becoming the self-styled father of modern film titles, Bass
decided to make his own films in the mid-1960s, while also designing corporate logos. Later, he and his wife Elaine returned to filmmaking and
film titles in the late 1970s and mid-1980s, respectively. The narrative of
Bass’s professional journey from graphics to live-action film to corporate
design is seen in its purest form in the self-produced film Bass on Titles. At
an AFI seminar, Bass stated: “My entry into the film world grew out of my
graphic work. When I came to California, I began to design symbols for
motion pictures, for Otto Preminger on The Man with the Golden Arm.
. . . So, I was well established in my career as a graphic designer before I
began working in film. . . . I began my film experience by pushing graphic
design stuff around and then got more immersed in the idea of live action
and became, in a sense, a filmmaker via that route.”54 He later admitted in
some oral histories that he actually began working in film advertising in
1938, more than fifteen years before his “official” start in the business.
However, Bass’s own chronology from posters to film credits to films to
corporate identity breaks down: he was directing commercials and industrial films long before his first official film, The Searching Eye, and his corporate identity work dates from the early 1950s, immediately after he
opened his own design studio.
Interestingly, given Bass’s obvious desire to manipulate and control
his own life story, two authorized biographies were commissioned in the
last years of his life, neither of which was published. Bass had approached
a representative of Harry Abrams & Company about a book as early as
1980.55 Bass initially wanted Herb Yager to write his biography; Yager had
authored the Graphis article (1978), had been heavily involved in the special Bass issue of the Japanese design magazine Idea (1979), and had
acted as interlocutor in Bass on Titles (1978). But Yager thought he would
be seen as too biased, given that he was Bass’s business partner.56 In the
late 1980s Owen Edwards, the founding editor of American Photogra-

17

SAUL BASS
pher, was commissioned to write a long essay for a heavily illustrated book
about Saul Bass as part of a new projected series on photographers and
designers.57 After he completed the piece, Edwards got a call from Bass
stating that he would not approve the essay because it “didn’t go deep
enough.”58 The manuscript, which amounted to less than a hundred
pages, quotes Bass extensively, as well as Art Goodman, but Bass’s editing
of his own quotes indicates he was not particularly happy with what he
had said to Edwards during their interviews.59 The project was quickly
abandoned by the publisher, who refused to pay the author more than 25
percent of his advance.
Bass and Yager must have decided that the time was ripe for a Bass
book, however, because a short time later they hired NPR film critic Joe
Morgenstern to write a biography. Morgenstern’s first draft was completed in April 1994.60 The 150-page manuscript is broken down into
twenty-five chapters with titles such as “A Subway Scholar Finds Betty
Grable,” “Saul & Elaine,” “Seeing Things Fresh,” and “Personal Handwriting.” The brevity of both Morgenstern’s and Edwards’s manuscripts
indicates that they were meant to be accompanied by numerous illustrations in a coffee table–style book. Although Morgenstern focuses on
Bass’s film work, including the two phases of his title-making career, the
author also dedicates chapters to corporate campaigns such as those for
Celanese, Lawry’s, United Airlines, Getty, Avery, and the Girl Scouts.
Publishers, however, were not buying it, even after the second draft,
with changes by Yager and Bass, was completed. Don Congdon Associates, a literary agent, noted in October 1994 that the manuscript needed
work, and a rejection letter from Simon and Schuster soon followed.61
Yager continued to shop the manuscript around, but Abrams, Viking Studio Books, John Macrae Books, W. W. Norton, and Universe Publishing
all sent their regrets. In all likelihood, the problem was that Morgenstern
had basically ghostwritten an autobiography in the guise of a biography;
in other words, Morgenstern’s manuscript was based solely on his interviews with Bass and papers and other materials provided by Bass’s office.
Meanwhile, Yager and Morgenstern got into a major tussle. In April,
Morgenstern had been promised payment for his work.62 But in July,
Yager told Morgenstern he was withholding the writer’s $5,000 fee
because the manuscript was only a draft, additional changes needed to be
made, and it was six months late. In the same letter, apparently sent in
reaction to Morgenstern’s complaints about not being paid, Yager noted

18

Introduction
acrimoniously: “Your letter amazed me. I am embarrassed. In one bizarre
and completely unnecessary overreaction, you obliterated our friendship.
As for Saul, he deserved better.”63 By then, Bard College professor Pat
Kirkham had started her own Saul Bass research project with a published
interview with Saul and Elaine Bass in April 1994. Thus, the decision was
made (probably sometime in 1995) to hire her to write the biography.
Bass continued to work on the layout and selection of images for this
book until his death.
Bass’s official biographical narrative was finally published posthumously in 2011. Saul Bass: A Life in Film and Design is a richly illustrated
tome that covers all facets of Bass’s career—his film title designs, corporate identity campaigns, and independently produced films. The most
original portion of the book is Pat Kirkham’s well-researched essay on
Bass’s childhood and early career. Apart from the survey of Bass’s career,
this large-format volume includes hundreds of illustrations, a listing of the
design studio’s projects for hire, and a bibliography. The book does not
highlight the work of any other designers in the Bass office (except for
Elaine Bass), yet for any Bass scholar, it is a rich source of documentation,
even if it perpetuates much of the Bass mythology.
No other full-length book study has been published, although
Andreas A. Timmer’s 1999 dissertation, “Making the Ordinary Extraordinary: The Film-Related Work of Saul Bass,” deserves mention. After
discussing modernist graphic design and Bass’s application of those
principles to film titles, Timmer focuses on Bass’s collaborations with
Preminger, Hitchcock, and Martin Scorsese, presenting close readings
of some Bass title sequence images but largely ignoring Bass’s use of
typography. He then discusses Bass’s work as a visual consultant on
Psycho, Spartacus, and Grand Prix, followed by analyses of Bass’s Why
Man Creates, Notes on the Popular Arts, and Phase IV. However, Timmer is a bit too telegraphic in his discussion of Bass’s work, which may
be why the dissertation has not been published. Timmer concludes:
Following his model Kepes while simultaneously establishing
his own approach, Bass describes himself as a “visual communicator” and not an artist with a capital A. What does this mean
for a designer working in the context of the entertainment
industry? In terms of high concept advertising it means art with
a practical and informational purpose. Bass succeeded in keeping

19

SAUL BASS
titles functional while at the same time elevating them into an
art form. Many of his credit sequences have a poetic quality that
both serves and transcends their functionality. What makes Bass
a master in his field is his ability to combine highly original
designs with popular appeal.64
Popular articles on Saul Bass have been limited to brief biographical
narratives, with only one short, formal analysis of a few Bass-created title
sequences in the mix.65 Other articles and interviews available on the
Internet do not go beyond the kind of hagiography Bass consistently
encouraged. One exception is Emily King’s master’s thesis, “Taking
Credit: Film Title Sequences, 1955–1965,” which includes chapters on
The Man with the Golden Arm, Vertigo, and Spartacus, as well as Maurice
Binder’s From Russia with Love and Richard Williams’s What’s New Pussycat. Although King recognizes and celebrates the revolutionary aspect of
the title designs created by Saul Bass and others, she remains ambiguous
about their long-term influence:
While title sequences which translated static graphic idioms onto
the screen were commonplace in the 1960s, they never became
the dominant mode of movie titling, nor were they ever completely displaced. From the late 1960s until now there has been
huge variety in styles of movie titling, from Woody Allen’s theatrestyle “cards” to the innovative computer animation in films such
as Superman (1978). Rather than either reflecting a shift in the
conventional relationship between Hollywood and modern
design, or amounting to a new element in the vocabulary of the
mainstream film-maker, the titles sequences addressed in this thesis were part of the widespread changes in film-making which were
eventually to render any single Hollywood formula redundant.66
There has been little academic research on the history of film studio
publicity campaigns, the marketing of film products, or Hollywood titling
practices, all of which could provide context for Bass’s work. Most publications have, in fact, centered on issues of censorship and exploitation.67
Although Emily King’s A Century of Movie Posters: From Silent to Art
House devotes several pages to Saul Bass, it is concerned mainly with film
directors rather than poster artists.68 Finally, a number of collectors and

20

Introduction
fans have published books of movie posters for the nostalgia market.
These may be good visual resources, but they hardly constitute serious
academic analysis.

A Designer in Hollywood
Bass’s film career challenges our theoretical assumptions about authorship
on a number of levels. Whether one designates the director, the producer,
or some other authority figure as the auteur of a film, Bass’s titles or other
interpolated sequences represent the only minutes of a film for which an
entity other than the “author” can claim sole credit for the text. But even
if we have given up on the notion of an author or the existence of a single
film text, as structuralist and post-structuralist theory articulates, the question remains, how do we evaluate Bass’s contribution as a designer? As
Ross Melnick recently posited, not only is the issue of a unified film text
in question; film historians must also consider those elements that can no
longer be recuperated, such as the actual live performance.69 Meanwhile,
film historians and theorists often conflate the physical film and all other
texts surrounding it (publicity, posters, trailers, advertising), reading them
as a master text guided by the producer, the director, or both. But I argue
that Bass’s intervention into that master text—whether titles, advertising,
television commercials, posters, or trailers—represents a unified vision,
outside that of the implied author’s master text. Nowhere is this more
apparent than in the controversy surrounding Psycho, which continues to
this day.
Uncontested is the fact that Bass is credited in the film for the titles
and as “visual consultant,” having acted in that capacity not only for the
opening credits but also for the storyboards for the infamous shower
sequence. When François Truffaut asked Hitchcock about Bass’s participation in the production of Psycho, Hitchcock replied that Bass had delivered sketches for the murder of the detective and had actually shot the
montage of him going up the stairs, but Hitchcock subsequently discarded it all. He said not one word about the shower sequence, which by
the mid-1960s had made Psycho famous.70 Possibly in reaction to Hitchcock’s niggardly apportionment of credit, or possibly because he was now
a feature film director himself (Phase IV) looking for credibility, Bass
dropped a bombshell in an interview with the London Sunday Times:
“When the film came out everyone went wild about the shower-bath

21

SAUL BASS
murder which I’d done, almost literally shot by shot, from my storyboard.
And then Hitchcock had second thoughts.”71 Since then, endless printer’s
ink has been devoted to the issue, and even Bass’s own statements are
somewhat of a moving target. At an AFI seminar in 1979, he all but took
credit for directing, without saying it outright: “I storyboarded it, and literally supervised the shooting of it. Hitchcock was on the set, and I
thought Hitch was going to direct it. But when I came to the set, he was
very generous and insisted I direct the shots. I got a short course with
Hitch on that picture.”72 Bass later insisted that Hitchcock had directed
the sequence: “But the truth of the matter is, it was and is Hitch’s film.
It’s all his, no matter what I did.”73
Unfortunately, all the eyewitness accounts, many of which have
denied any Bass involvement in the direction of the shower sequence, are
unreliable, since all were articulated long after the fact.74 Here, I briefly
summarize the major positions and offer my own take on the subject. Stephen Rebello has criticized both Hitchcock and Bass for overstating their
positions, but he ultimately comes down on the side of the film’s director.75 Interestingly, in the recent Hitchcock biopic based on Rebello’s
book, Bass has been all but written out of the story.76 Pat Kirkham, in contrast, makes a forceful case for Bass’s authorship of the shower sequence;
although it seems very convincing, it is based more on speculation and
formal design than on any hard evidence.77 The late Raymond Durgnat
skirts the question altogether, commenting on Bass’s titles but analyzing
the shower sequence from an auteurist-formalist and psychoanalytic perspective, without even mentioning the authorship controversy.78
Based on evidence from various sources, I believe that Bass may have
set up a few shots under Hitchcock’s supervision, and Bass did design the
storyboards, almost all of which ended up as images in the final edit.
Hitchcock also allowed Bass to shoot 16mm tests, which Bass describes
with some precision, as well as suggest an edit. As far as directing, Bass
later conceded that Hitchcock invited him to set up the first and second
shots, but probably no more than that.79 Thus, it is likely that Hitchcock
hired Bass to create an Eisensteinian montage for the first murder because
he envisioned a shockingly sudden demise for his leading lady and needed
a montage specialist, which he decidedly was not. But in the end, Alfred
and Alma Hitchcock worked out the final edit after the first previews, so
Psycho was ultimately not only Hitchcock’s financial risk but also very
much his own work.

22

Introduction
So why did Bass start this controversy? One must wonder whether it
was a public relations ploy, since Bass made no claims about directing the
shower sequence until he had become a feature film director himself with
Phase IV. Maybe the publicity was just too good to turn down, given that
Bass could, with some credibility, challenge the authorship of one of the
few film directors who was truly a household name in America, and given
that his business was starting to go south. Or was it merely a casual remark
that got out of hand? We will never know, but I’m assuming that for Bass
it was a branding issue, in the sense that he wanted to reestablish his
expertise as a director and a montage specialist, having previously designed
or produced sequences for Stanley Kubrick, Vincente Minnelli, Carl Foreman, and John Frankenheimer, among others.
Like these directors, most of Bass’s Hollywood clients were or wanted
to be seen as auteurs. As I argue here, Saul Bass (and the role of the
designer) came into prominence as the studio system was crumbling and
independent producer-director hyphenates were on the rise. These independents, whether Otto Preminger, Stanley Kramer, Billy Wilder, or Stanley Kubrick, had high artistic aspirations for their films and employed Bass
to give their work cachet. That was possible because of the gradual breakdown of the studio system and the ebbing of power held by studio production and publicity departments. Nevertheless, Bass’s style and
techniques were still considered avant-garde by many in the industry, and
his efforts to realize his design ideas were always subject to pressure from
the more traditional elements in the Hollywood system.
Rather than seeing any artistic production within the commercial film
industry as “selling out,” and thus substantiating the romantically inflected
dichotomy between art and commerce, newer film and media histories
have advanced the notion that it was possible to work in Hollywood but
still participate in avant-garde practices. David James notes that avantgarde filmmakers and Hollywood have always had a symbiotic relationship: “Even when the concerns of minority cinemas are quite specific,
often their expression creates cultural forms whose difference, more or
less reworked, can be productively assimilated by other groups or by the
industry. But this function of the avant-garde as the research and development branch of the cultural industry is reciprocated in the latter’s utility
for the avant-garde. Minority practices are inevitably framed by the dominant industry and determined by its overall structure.”80
With regard to Bass’s commercial design work, whether in movie

23

SAUL BASS
publicity, filmmaking, or advertising, I would characterize it as a modernist avant-garde practice constituted within Hollywood rather than in
opposition to it. This seems not only advisable, given the formal innovation and consistent branding apparent in all of Bass’s work, but also necessary, given the designer’s education. Directly indebted to teachers who
had studied and worked at the Bauhaus in Weimar Germany, Bass translated the Bauhaus ethic and aesthetic into an American idiom, just as Walter Gropius, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, and Gyorgy Kepes transplanted
Bauhaus ideals to Chicago and New York in post–World War II America.
Indeed, the central Bauhaus notion of art and design having both aesthetic and functional applications was put into practice in 1920s Germany
and 1950s America.
To illuminate not only how that process of aesthetic translation
worked but also its historical and cultural coordinates (specifically in terms
of Saul Bass, and generally in terms of high modernism’s infiltration of
American cultural practice), it might be productive to invoke a concept
such as vernacular modernism. As Miriam Hansen notes, “modernism
encompasses a whole range of cultural and artistic practices that register,
respond to, and reflect upon processes of modernization and the experience of modernity, including a paradigmatic transformation of the conditions under which art is produced, transmitted, and consumed. In other
words, just as modernist aesthetics are not reducible to the category of
style, they tend to blur the boundaries of the institution of art in its traditional, eighteenth- and nineteenth-century incarnation that turns on the
ideal of aesthetic autonomy and the distinction of ‘high’ vs. ‘low,’ of
autonomous art vs. popular and mass culture.” Hansen argues that the
high modernist canon—with its specific “single-logic” genealogy from
“Cubism to Abstract Expressionism,” from Brecht to the theater of the
absurd, from Eisenstein to Godard or Walter Ruttmann to Stan Brakhage—essentialized the role of the artist while denying modernism’s infiltration of many commercial genres and “vernacular” forms of cultural
practice entailing “connotations of discourse, idiom, and dialect, with circulation, promiscuity, and translatability.” What Hansen is getting at here
is that many forms of mass culture, whether Hollywood film narratives or
their advertising, communicate in a dialogue with diverse and divergent
consumers. And while I’m hesitant to accept Hansen’s notion that all
Hollywood narrative cinema in its classical phase imbricates with the modernist project, I agree that the very act of constituting what is almost

24

Introduction
always a partial or overdetermined discourse in Hollywood resulted in
varying degrees of self-reflexivity; further, this awareness of engaging in a
discourse is the raison d’être of modernist art. As Hansen writes: “The
reflexive dimension of Hollywood films in relation to modernity may take
cognitive, discursive, and narrativized forms, but it is crucially anchored in
sensory experience and sensational affect, in processes of mimetic identification that are more often than not partial and excessive in relation to
narrative comprehension.”81
Saul Bass’s film work, whether titles created for independent producer-directors or his own films, must therefore be seen as a continual
effort to bring avant-garde practices to Hollywood. His design elements
exude modernism not only because of the Bauhaus influence but also
because Bass himself preferred a more fragmented approach that left
interpretive spaces open, allowing the audience to read film texts
subjectively.

The Bass Brand
According to Pat Kirkham, Bass saw and loved Maya Deren’s Meshes in the
Afternoon (1945), as well as other avant-garde films. Over the course of
his career, Bass consistently worked with American avant-garde filmmakers such as. the Whitney brothers and Pat O’Neill. Bass’s personal films
contributed to the essay film genre pioneered by Chris Marker and JeanLuc Godard, but with precedents in Dziga Vertov.82 Indeed, Bass films
such as The Searching Eye and Why Man Creates question audiences
directly and provide possible but not definitive answers; they consciously
communicate knowledge through vision. Jean-Pierre Gorin’s dictum
regarding the essay film certainly pertains to these Bass titles: it is “the
meandering of an intelligence that tries to multiply the entries and the
exits into the material it has elected (or by which it has been elected).”83
And just as montage is central to the aesthetic of the essay film, with the
hand of the editor crafting a way of seeing and hearing, the visual tropes
of the eye (vision) and the hand (creating form) are central to the Bass
brand.
As early as 1957, we see Bass utilizing pure abstraction in his credit
sequence for Billy Wilder’s The Seven Year Itch. This sequence is all the
more striking because its relationship to the narrative is as abstract as
abstract art. Was Bass thinking of the New York City brownstones that are

25

SAUL BASS
the locale for the film’s action? What interests me here is the way Bass limits his color palette to black, white, and various hues from red to brown,
making the sequence nothing if not a study of a limited corner of the
color wheel. The sequence recalls both the American abstract expressionists (who were being recognized in the 1950s as the most avant-garde artists in the world) and the German painters of and around the Bauhaus
school, such as Paul Klee.
Paul Klee’s Flora in the Sand is one of a series of paintings by the artist
that reduce topographies to various squares and rectangles of color. It is
this concept of using flat planes of color to visualize geographic space that
connects this 1927 painting to Bass’s titles for The Seven Year Itch. And
while it may be foolhardy to make a direct link between these two works,
as I have here, the possibilities are rich in terms of comparing the works of
many Bauhaus artists with Bass’s work. Certainly, Bauhaus art courses and
aesthetics theorized that geometry and abstraction were central elements
of composition within the two-dimensional frame, even if the objects
depicted were less abstracted or even photographic. Photography was, of
course, taught in the basic Bauhaus art course, and Bauhaus photography
workshops were extremely active. Almost all Bauhaus artists took up photography at one point or another, and Moholy-Nagy was possibly the
most active of the group.
Abstraction thus became a major design element in the photographic
work of the Bauhaus artists. Lotte Beese’s 1927 photograph of a loom
(Anni Albers ran the textile workshop at the Bauhaus and would become
one of the most famous textile designers in America) reduces the machine
to an abstract play of light, line, and form. Indeed, its original function as
a loom is completely lost in the photographic image. However, what we
do see is an image that, despite its abstraction, manages to create a sense
of depth and the impression of a machine, even if we don’t know what
that machine does. Compare this image with Saul and Elaine Bass’s title
sequence for Casino (1995; see chapter 5), which frames Las Vegas neon
in such a way as to create nothing more than abstract patterns of light,
making it virtually impossible to identify. The sequence becomes a cacophony of light and color, revealing neither the content (specific casino signs)
nor the locale but nevertheless conveying the sense of endless activity that
is Las Vegas. For Bass, the formal design elements, the use of circles,
squares, and lines of movement, were the heart of any design.
Saul Bass’s design work in cinema and film publicity must be seen first

26

Introduction
and foremost as a graphic art, evolving from his training as a graphic artist.
As the following chapters show, Bass conceptualized film as a two-dimensional space, composing his images for a frame rather than for the window
into the world theorized by André Bazin and other realists. His title
sequences, as well as his films, communicate meaning through composition, creating graphics in motion that are astounding today because they
were produced with analogue technology rather than digital, computergenerated programs. Indeed, Bass’s designs in film presage cinema’s
return in the twenty-first century to animation and painting, as theorized
by Lev Manovich: “The manual construction of images in digital cinema
represents a return to nineteenth century pre-cinematic practices, when
images were hand-painted and hand-animated. At the turn of the twentieth century, cinema was to delegate these manual techniques to animation
and define itself as a recording medium. As cinema enters the digital age,
these techniques are again becoming the commonplace in the filmmaking
process. Consequently, cinema can no longer be clearly distinguished
from animation. It is no longer an indexical media technology but, rather,
a sub-genre of painting.”84
Bass’s interest in Bauhaus design elements also led him to become a
film montage specialist. One can argue that Bass’s designs incorporated
montage before he ever touched a foot of film. By the 1950s, he was
working closely with editors to learn about editing. Bass loved the endless
possibilities of montage, of putting together a syntactic unit of film images;
he loved thinking in terms of montage. As a result, camera movements in
Bass’s film titles and films are few and far between, even in his later films
such as The Solar Film and Quest. It was not until the 1980s, possibly due
to the influence of Elaine Bass, that camera movement became more
prominent in his titles; for instance, the titles for War of the Roses and Mr.
Saturday Night both feature long, horizontal camera tracks, exploring
landscapes. In contrast, Art Goodman’s animation sequences in Why Man
Creates and The Solar Film are explorations through time, but they are
constructed as camera movements through space, based, of course, on the
illusion of movement through animated images.
Camera movement implies a journey, and journeys through time and
space were central to the Bass universe. His end title sequence for Around
the World in 80 Days was the first of many quest narratives Bass would
design and execute. The quest, whether intellectual or physical, became
the structuring presence in many of his own films: From Here to There, The

27

SAUL BASS
Searching Eye, Why Man Creates, Phase IV, and Quest. Like the quests of
classical mythology, visual metaphor transforms these journeys into a
search for knowledge. Indeed, vision and sight become synonymous with
knowledge, especially when the communication of knowledge is visual
rather than verbal.
Bass created more than modernist designs; he consciously created a
brand that was recognizable to both industry professionals and laypersons. The work of Saul Bass & Associates must be understood as a brand
created by a design office with numerous contributing individuals, even if
Saul (and later Elaine) was the controlling intelligence behind that brand.
The Bass brand was rigorously maintained by limiting the design palette
to a certain number of techniques and design elements. Regardless of
whether he was working on movie advertising campaigns, film titles, short
films, corporate logos, or corporate identity campaigns, the integrity of
the Bass identity had to be maintained. Incorporating modernist and
avant-garde designs into the Bass brand, however, did not imply improvisation. In fact, quite the opposite was true: nothing was left to chance.
Once a concept had been agreed on, often after endless discussion, the
Bass office or often Bass himself storyboarded everything, down to the
blocking of actors.85 Even if the titles and films were supposed to look like
they had been spontaneously constructed, the product of experimentation or fiddling around, as Bass called it, they were always consciously
developed and executed.
Saul Bass’s designs have been held in high esteem for decades by his
peers, as well as by specialists in other fields, yet the time is ripe for a critical reevaluation of all of Bass’s work. Certainly, his designs were valued in
the commercial marketplace, where he commanded fees that might have
priced him out of the Hollywood market, at least until he made a comeback in the late 1980s. Now, more than fifteen years after the designer’s
death, it is time to measure Bass’s contribution to the field, beyond some
of the mythologies associated with him. My historical analysis of the Saul
Bass legacy seeks to contextualize his work within the historical coordinates of Hollywood film production and movie publicity—specifically, the
evolution of film posters from the earliest days to the present, his advertising work, his film titles, and his films. Finally, Bass must be seen in the
context of the larger social developments in post–World War II America—
namely, the increase in intellectual respectability among the design profession, its recognition by society as a legitimate profession, and the upward

28

Introduction
mobility of designers in the financial hierarchy of rewards and withholdings. As previously demonstrated by others, it was the influx of Europeanborn or -trained designers (many of them German-Jewish exiles) into
1950s America that vastly expanded the palate for and the palette of
acceptable design in this country. Furthermore, I contend that Bass was
keenly aware of the pioneering role he played in his chosen field, sometimes even relishing his part as agent provocateur in Hollywood’s conservative guild system, yet producing seminal aesthetic work that largely
conformed to the system’s needs. The designer can truly claim a place next
to the greats of mid-twentieth-century American design: Ivan Chermayeff,
Milton Glaser, Paul Rand, Ikko Tanaka, and Henryk Tomaszewski.86

Analyzing Saul Bass Designs in Film
In the chapters that follow, I analyze the design work of Saul Bass & Associates as it pertained to the film industry. Although I quote Saul Bass,
when relevant, to indicate some form of intentionality, my ultimate goal is
to define the designer through his work. Therefore, my analyses often
begin with a formalist approach, presenting what is actually on the page
or on the screen, then bringing in larger social, political, or contextual
issues. As a result, the portrait that evolves may have little to do with the
flesh-and-blood human being who was Saul Bass. Rather, I’m interested
in the way his work created design standards in the film industry that are
still valid today, more than fifteen years after his death. The Bass brand, as
I argue, has a tangible existence in the work that survives, as well as in the
work of designers who followed him.
Chapter 1, “Designer and Filmmaker,” begins with a brief biography
of Saul Bass and then pursues the intellectual and aesthetic roots of the
Saul Bass brand. It is not enough to simply invoke the Bauhaus, as other
writers have done. Instead, I demonstrate how Bass appropriated and
internalized Bauhaus concepts as articulated by Moholy-Nagy and Kepes,
primarily through the visual examples published in the seminal work of
both these designers. Given that Bass spent at least fifteen years involved
in movie advertising, I then present a short history of the field to tease out
what was different about Bass’s designs once he began to find his own
voice and create what would become the Bass brand. I conclude first with
definitions of the Bass design style and brand, focusing finally on the many
recurring visual motifs in his design work.

29

SAUL BASS
Chapter 2, “Film Titles: Theory and Practice,” focuses on the history
and practice of producing film titles or credit sequences. Arguably, this is
where Bass’s influence was most strongly felt. After briefly analyzing Bass’s
titles for That’s Entertainment II, his own informal history of titles, I lay
out the technical and aesthetic development of titles in Hollywood and
then turn to the theories underlying all titling. Unlike virtually every other
commentator on Bass’s title work, I initially privilege typography and the
role of the modernist design grid as an aesthetic precept in his titles. I next
turn to the many production strategies employed in his title work.
Although some titles were purely graphic in design, others utilized various
forms of animation or photographic montages, yet almost all referenced
modern art. Indeed, Bass was consciously incorporating not only European modernist design standards but also contemporary American art
(e.g., Abstract Expressionism) into his work in an effort to raise the bar in
Hollywood.
Chapter 3, “Creating a Mood: Pars pro toto,” digs deeper into the
Bass methodology, particularly his penchant for creating pithy symbols for
his posters and film publicity—logo-like forms that functioned symbolically like his corporate identity designs. I also present a brief history of
movie posters to illustrate what was revolutionary about Bass’s designs.
Then I demonstrate how his posters, especially those created for Otto
Preminger, consciously quoted modernist art and artists in order to imbue
his movie publicity campaigns with a seriousness of purpose. Next I tease
out not only the formalist aspects of his movie design work but also recurring thematic elements, as expressed in selected film title designs. Interestingly, for all his modernist aspirations, Bass was equally drawn to an almost
mystical conception of signs, the elements of fire and water, and the concrete world of objects and landscapes morphing into abstract notions of
the mind.
Chapter 4, “Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views,” moves from the
single image to Bass’s construction of meaning through montage. The
designer’s penchant for dissecting and then reanimating body parts comes
into play almost everywhere in his work—the disembodied hand being an
almost obsessive visual trope—but particularly in his titles for Anatomy of
a Murder. Bass’s methodology for constructing meaning in film was based
on Eisensteinian concepts of montage, whereby the body of a film consists
of a stitching together of countless moving images. In this connection, I
first analyze Bass’s previously neglected work in television commercials,

30

Introduction
where he cut his film production teeth. Then I discuss title sequences
based on montage and the way they contribute to the initial impression of
the film. The chapter concludes with a close reading of his independently
produced environmental film The Solar Film, which largely functions nonverbally through a montage of images.
Chapter 5, “The Urban Landscape,” explores what I believe to be
one of the ur-sites of modernist art and avant-garde films: the modern
cityscape. Bass’s titles here move from modernist abstraction and graphics
to documentary montages, as developed in the avant-garde city films of
the 1920s and 1930s. I then analyze another ubiquitous visual trope in
Bass’s work involving the urban environment—namely, city lights, as
articulated in film titles and his first short animated film. I conclude with
the image of the city in Bass’s commercials for National Bohemian Beer.
Chapter 6, “Journeys of Discovery: Seeing Is Knowledge,” further
explores the notion of travel and the quest as forms of knowledge, based
on visual perception. A number of Bass’s film titles are structured as journeys, yet for the most part, it is the audience that experiences intellectual
growth, not the characters engaged in the journey. That position changes
radically with Bass’s independent short films, which are all structured as
journeys during which the audience learns to see and perceive what lies
beneath the surface. What is also apparent in his short films, especially The
Searching Eye and Quest, is the way Bass has transformed himself from an
urban Jewish modernist into a California nature enthusiast with seemingly
mystical and spiritual leanings.
Finally, Chapter 7, “Civilization: Organizing Knowledge through
Communication,” highlights Bass’s work as a communicator of ideas and
history, whether in his opening credits, montage sequences, or films.
Beginning with his previously unknown promotional film Apples and
Oranges, which visualizes the findings of an important study comparing
television and magazine advertising, I then discuss his animated short,
100 Years of the Telephone. Next, I analyze what I perceive to be his magnum opus, Why Man Creates, which encapsulates many of Bass’s ideas
about art and civilization and is presented in a form that gives the viewer
freedom to contribute to the film’s meaning. In other words, it is a truly
modernist work of art. I conclude with his lone feature film, Phase IV,
which, despite its unhappy production and release history, has been celebrated as a complex science fiction film that in many ways explodes notions
of genre while asking the question, what makes us human?

31

1

Designer and Filmmaker
One of the most striking aspects of Saul Bass’s epically successful career as a
designer was that he was essentially an autodidact without formal academic
training. While his official biographies note that he studied with Howard
Trafton and Gyorgy Kepes (the latter a superstar designer in his own right),
the fact was that Bass’s “studies” were limited to a handful of night-school
courses. Bass was always very modest on this point, reminding interviewers
that there were few opportunities to study graphic design in America at that
time because “commercial art” was considered a lowly profession.1 Though
it is true that some colleges were offering degrees in graphic design, the
economic pressures of the Depression played a role in Bass’s decision to
enter the workforce rather than attend college. Not surprisingly, Bass was
skeptical about the value of an academic education: “I don’t see artists as
engaging in esoteric activity, but as a worker, engaged in a particular kind of
skill.”2 Bass certainly never played the role of an intellectual; rather, he epitomized the engaged craftsman of quality, which may have been why he fit
into the classical Hollywood paradigm so well: there, almost everyone
learned by doing rather than by attending school. As Bass noted in 1990:
“I guess what makes me uncomfortable is the word ‘philosophy.’ For me
design is a ‘craft.’ And I try very hard to be a good craftsman.”3
Like many Hollywood practitioners (and many commercial designers), Bass later affected an aversion to any kind of theorization or analysis
of his work. In interviews he threw out a few theoretical bones, such as his
notion of revitalizing clichés or a theoretical explication of reductionist
modes of creativity, but they were part of his official narrative. Any analytic discussion of the formal characteristics of a particular work got sidetracked into whether the design caught anyone’s attention. Douglas Bell,
in a regrettably unfinished oral history, tried valiantly to engage Bass in a
dialogue about the formal elements of his campaign for The Champion

33

SAUL BASS
(1949), an early example of what would become the Bass brand. Bell kept
suggesting meanings, which Bass lobbed right back without comment,
focusing instead on the incredible impact his advertising campaign had had
in Hollywood. When Bell mentioned Kepes’s concept of “dynamic iconography” as a theoretical tool for understanding Bass’s unconventional use of
graphic space in The Champion campaign, Bass retorted that such terms are
“so general as to be meaningless.” Unperturbed, Bell tried another tactic
and got this response: “Well, you could read a lot into it.” Finally, Bass got
curt: “You have to be careful about theories and about so-called principles.
I don’t know what the principles are, Doug.” He then explained that when
he was younger he had been insecure, but now he believed only in intuition. Bass closed the discussion with a coup de grace: “Fruitless to speculate about it, except that it’s amusing to talk about it. But you can’t deal
with it seriously, other than as sort of an intellectual arabesque.”4 Sounding
a bit like John Ford in his famous interview with Peter Bogdanovich,5 Bass
was not about to reveal his trade secrets or intellectualize his own work.
When another interviewer questioned his philosophy of design, Bass shot
back: “Theories are very dangerous, and philosophy is theory. God help
you if you do your next piece based on a theory, you are lost.”6
Ironically, early in his career, the Hollywood community perceived
Bass as somewhat of a New York egghead. And he was not averse to intellectual discussions about design. According to Al Kallis, Bass loved to discuss theory and process, engaging in endless philosophical and aesthetic
debates about why it was better to lay out an ad one way or another.7 Bass
was not lying about his intuitive grasp of good design. But then, Bass
learned by intuition. A year before his death, a profile on Bass noted:
“The self-knowledge he has from all the years of practice is that his art and
craft, so often praised and followed, is not a science, but something more
intuitive.”8 Bass’s burning ambition in life was to become “Saul Bass,” so
he consumed art and design with a vociferous appetite. Asked about his
influences, he mentioned one of his mentors: “I watched Paul Rand, five
years my senior, like a hawk.”9 Rand, for his part, was worried that Bass
was copying him.10

Saul Bass: A Brief Biography
Bass was born in the Bronx, New York, on 8 May 1920 to Jewish, Yiddish-speaking parents who had emigrated from the Romanian-Ukrainian

34

Designer and Filmmaker
shtetl. He graduated from James Monroe High School at age fifteen,
already winning awards for his art and draftsmanship.11 A precocious
child, Bass was fascinated by the Egyptian exhibits at the Metropolitan
Museum of Art. Indeed, archaeology and ancient cultures would become
a lifelong fascination; the designer, who believed in reincarnation, thought
he either had been an archaeologist in a former life or would become one
in the next life.12 Bass began working for a freelance designer in an entrylevel position—getting coffee, picking up supplies, and the like. He also
received a scholarship from the Art Students League, and in September
1936 he enrolled in an evening class, Layout and Design for Industry,
taught by Howard Trafton; Bass continued to take art classes at night
until at least late 1940.13 Trafton focused heavily on fine art, but he also
gave his students training they could use in commercial art, being a practitioner himself. As Bass stated to biographer Joe Morgenstern: “Intuitively, I understood that if I wanted to come to grips with design, i.e. with
so-called commercial art, I really had to understand the principles that
made fine art work.”14
Meanwhile, in 1938 Bass moved to a small New York firm that produced trade advertisements for United Artists and then for Warner Brothers (for twice the money). He married Ruth Cooper and had two children:
Robert in 1942 and Andrea in 1946. In 1941 Bass was promoted to 20th
Century–Fox as a layout man; he earned excellent wages but had little
freedom to design advertisements that deviated from the depressing
norm.15 According to Pat Kirkham, Bass was so unhappy with the movie
publicity business that he quit in 1943 and took a job at half pay at an
advertising agency, Blaine Thompson Company, “with the proviso that he
not work on movie studio ads.”16 However, when the agency ran into
trouble with its Warner Brothers account, Bass was brought in to help.17
Thus, Bass received an extensive apprenticeship in film advertising that
lasted more than ten years. He learned not only the standard practices of
the day but also what he, as a designer, did not want to do. By this time,
Bass had already joined the Screen Publicists Guild, participating in June
1942 in a Civilian Defense Information Bureau demonstration at Macy’s
as a quick-sketch artist.18
Sometime in late 1944 Bass discovered Gyorgy Kepes’s The Language
of Vision.19 According to another early interview,20 Bass first read Laszlo
Moholy-Nagy’s The New Vision: From Material to Architecture.21 In any
case, Bass learned that Kepes was teaching around the corner at Brooklyn

35

SAUL BASS
College and apparently enrolled in his class. Kepes, a former collaborator
of Moholy-Nagy’s, had studied at the Bauhaus in Weimar Germany before
being forced by the Nazis to immigrate to the United States via London.
Kepes and, by extension, Moholy-Nagy would exert an enormous influence on Bass, turning the budding adman’s vague artistic aspirations into
a concrete set of goals and principles that would become hallmarks of the
Bass brand. When asked in an interview how Kepes had influenced him,
Bass noted that his work had become more dynamic and abstract: “I
began to deal with non-illustrative formal elements in addition to the formal elements . . . it was a very dramatic step for me.”22 Bass was particularly struck by an exercise Kepes had his students do after a discussion of
Mondrian and the tension between color fields moving forward or backward. Bass stated: “His classes changed everything for me. In a way, I was
trying to open the door, pulling and pushing the knob. Kepes said, ‘Turn
it,’ and I stepped through.”23
In 1946 Bass was lured away by Buchanan & Company, the fifth largest advertising agency in the United States. He was hired to be an art
director in its newly established West Coast offices, where Paul Radin was
creative director. (As a producer, Radin would later hire Bass to direct
Phase IV.) Buchanan handled the substantial Paramount Pictures account,
as well as the advertising for other major American firms, so the twentysix-year-old Bass moved to Hollywood. As he noted in a 1981 interview:
“I decided that New York was not only very cold but very dull and that I
needed to warm up.”24 His first West Coast workplace was the fabled
“Garden of Allah,” at the southwest corner of Sunset and Crescent
Heights. In a May 1947 advertisement in Variety, Buchanan & Company
announced its new address on Canon Drive in Beverly Hills and its staff,
which included John Krimsky as manager of the motion picture division,
with Radin and Bass reporting to him.25 Bass later claimed there were two
reasons for his preference for California: one was the movie business, and
the other was that the corporate business culture in California was “primitive,” meaning “there has been little time for the stifling institutionalization and stratification which strangles creativity in many, very old or
established business.”26 Bass understood that his chances of breaking into
the commercial design business were far greater in California than in New
York, where long-established WASP design firms dominated Madison
Avenue.
In February 1949 Bass was involved in a terrible automobile accident

36

Designer and Filmmaker
in Pasadena on his way to Art Directors Club awards ceremony, where he
was supposed to pick up one gold medal and two certificates of merit.
Instead, he ended up at Temple Hospital with a shattered hip.27 A subsequent infection caused his hip to become necrotic, and he suffered from
the aftereffects for the rest of his life.28 Given that such injuries tend to be
adversely affected by cold and dampness, the warm California weather was
an added incentive to stay in the West.
By July 1950 Bass was Buchanan’s executive art director, handling,
among other things, the United Artists account.29 Although much of the
film advertising he did was still ho-hum, Bass began to push the boundaries, especially when working with the independent producer-directors
who would soon help upend the studio system. They allowed him to
incorporate new ideas about advertising design into his work. But Bass
knew the studio system too well, and he understood that studio politics
rarely changed: “Once you work for a studio you get caught up in the
‘group decision’ mentality. Nobody wants to take the responsibility for
anything, so everybody plays it safe and criticizes.”30 Most of his United
Artists clients were independents, including Stanley Kramer Productions,
for which Bass designed advertisements and premiere invitations for
Champion (1949), Death of a Salesman (1951), and The Sniper (1952),
among others.31 He worked simultaneously with directors Mark Robson
and Edward Dmytryk, who would both later hire him for movie title
work, as would Kramer. He also created advertising designs for Joseph
Mankiewicz’s No Way Out (1950) and All About Eve (1950), Fred
Zinnemann’s The Men (1950) and High Noon (1952), and Anatole Litvak’s Decision before Dawn (1951), all of which displayed elements of the
evolving Bass style.32 As an employee, Bass was not yet signing his name
to his work, unlike Paul Rand, whose poster for No Way Out demonstrated the lockstep in design concepts between the two men.
Meanwhile, Bass continued to design advertisements and selected
print material for other Buchanan clients, including Rexall Drugstores,
Reynolds Aluminum, and Western Airlines. By August 1951 Bass was
ready to move on again and took a position at Foote, Cone & Belding;
the advertising agency was going through a major reorganization after the
departure of one of its founders, Emerson Foote.33 Bass was brought in to
handle the account for RKO, a movie studio owned at the time by eccentric billionaire Howard Hughes. Bass enjoyed relating anecdotes about
midnight meetings with the reclusive Hughes in limousines. Once he got

37

SAUL BASS
Hughes’s approval on RKO’s advertising campaigns, Bass would be
unceremoniously dumped on a street corner and left to find his own way
home.34
Bass worked for Hughes until late 1952, when he quit after allegedly
being denied a salary raise. Bass then founded his own firm, and over the
next several years he designed mostly from home as he attempted to establish his brand, sometimes bringing in other freelancers. He earned a steady
income from his freelance movie ads and tried to break free of the conventions that demanded every square inch of ad space be filled with content.
With Bass, it was all about designing clean, legible, unique material.
Although Bass had done his own lettering and calligraphy during his years
of apprenticeship, he used other artists once he became an art director.
According to Al Kallis, who worked with Bass for several years in the mid1950s, Bass conceptualized the layout and design, while Kallis drew the
art and Maury Nemoy handled the typography and calligraphy.35 Another
steady collaborator on film titles was Harold Adler, who created the lettering for Carmen Jones, Man with the Golden Arm, The Seven Year Itch,
and the Hitchcock titles.
Bass continued to maintain an office at Foote, Cone, & Belding for a
while. Then he shared digs in Hollywood (at Highland and Franklin) with
Maury Nemoy and another freelance designer, Phyllis Tanner, with whom
he also collaborated, before finally setting up his own design office at
1778 Highland Avenue.36 However, Bass worked largely from home in
the mid-1950s, and a contemporary article on West Coast designers mentions Bass splitting his time between Hollywood and an Altadena studio,
the latter in his home.37 Meanwhile, his wife Ruth raised the two children
and worked on a PhD in physiology at the University of Southern California. In 1959 Bass’s firm moved to 7758 Sunset Boulevard, which was a
small house that had been converted to office spaces. The two-car garage
doubled as a film studio, with a 16mm Steenbeck, projectors, and a white
wall for screenings. In 1965 Saul Bass Associates moved to 7039 Sunset
Boulevard in West Hollywood, which included a larger warehouse space
in the back. By then, about ten to twelve people worked in the office. The
front office was always “neat as a pin,” and the walls were painted, at
Bass’s insistence, ocher and olive green.38 Bass was particularly meticulous
about his little menagerie of pre-Columbian fetish statues, which could
not be moved under any circumstances.39
In 1957, shortly after moving to Highland Avenue, Bass hired Elaine

38

Designer and Filmmaker
A. Makatura as his secretary.40 After divorcing his first wife, Ruth, Saul and
Elaine were married on 30 September 1961 and eventually had two children, Jennifer and Jeffrey. Other longtime employees who joined the Bass
team in 1960 included artist-animator Art Goodman, who had started
working as a freelancer for Bass in 1956 and became his “right hand
man.”41 Photographer George Arakaki and production manager Nancy
von Lauderbach also worked for Bass. Morrie Marsh, a former printing
company salesman who had known Bass professionally since the early
1950s, became Bass’s business manager, a position he maintained until he
was—in his opinion—ruthlessly pushed aside by Herb Yager.42 Numerous
other filmmakers and photographers worked on individual projects on
a freelance basis, including the Whitney brothers, Bill Melendez,
Pat O’Neill, Herb Klynn, Jules Engel, Bob Willoughby, and Jerry
Fruchtman.
Lightcraft of California was the first company that hired Bass to conceive a corporate identity campaign. From there, Bass broadened his market base to include numerous commercial clients for which he designed
“space advertisements, package design, merchandise and point-of-sales
displays, exhibitions, direct mail pieces, and company stationery.”43 His
commercial clients included Brett Lithographing Company, Glide windows, General Pharmaceutical Corporation, Frank Holmes Laboratories,
Flo-Ball pens, Madre Selva cosmetics, Pabco paint, Carson-Roberts Company, and John W. Westley Associates.44 It is no accident that Bass went
independent at this time, expanding his base and design services beyond
the movie advertising business. According to designer and Bass intimate
Lou Dorfsman, “In 1949, the advertising/communications business,
which had been very white, Anglo-Saxon, Protestant, broke wide open.
You suddenly had Jews, Greeks, all kinds of people in the business, who
gave it an incredible shot in the arm.”45 Indeed, Bass’s corporate identity
campaign for ALCOA (along with Rand’s campaign for IBM) pioneered
these efforts in American marketing and made Bass a household name in
design. His rebranding of AT&T in the late 1960s was the largest such
effort in U.S. corporate history.46 Unlike the very modest fees earned for
film design work (less than $30,000), corporate logos and corporate identity campaigns could bring in millions of dollars.47
With the rise of independent film production, the trend in Hollywood was to move away from big advertising agencies, with their anonymous workforces, and toward boutique operations led by designers who

39

SAUL BASS
would cater to individual client’s needs and be more flexible and faster,
given the tighter production schedules.48 An incredible showman, Bass
utilized his verbal acuity to make the pitch to potential clients in Hollywood and dove into the booming postwar Southern California economy.
Less than a decade after his move to Los Angeles, Bass would be hailed by
a Swiss design journal as a leader of California modernism.49
It was in 1954 that Bass first tried his hand at designing title sequences
for films. He had been hired by Otto Preminger to create the publicity art
for Carmen Jones, including the poster, and was then given the opportunity to do the titles as well. For decades, Hollywood studios had treated
credit sequences as an afterthought, usually employing standardized
graphics with the company logo. However, some independent Hollywood producers had begun to experiment with new graphic elements and
animated sequences to create a particular mood or feeling before the
film’s actual narrative commenced. Saul Bass was in the forefront of this
development, and his credit sequences utilized graphic elements from his
advertising campaign designs. For the first time in Hollywood’s modern
era, a graphic designer (Bass) received onscreen credit for title work. As
the press book for Carmen Jones notes: “There’s been a lot of talk
among those who have seen Carmen Jones . . . about the unusual credits
which precede the film. Unusual in itself, the designer of the titles is
credited—one Saul Bass. They are distinctive in terms of modern
design, for their neat, clean, open look.”50
In fact, Bass received almost instant recognition for his innovative title
work, as evidenced by an article in the New York Times in December
1957, barely two years after he entered the movie title field.51 Using the
same designer to create both the film titles and the publicity meant that a
film could be “branded.” According to Bass: “My initial thoughts about
what a title can do was to set mood and the prime underlying core of the
film’s story, to express the story in some metaphorical way. I saw the title
as a way of conditioning the audience, so that when the film actually
began, viewers would already have an emotional resonance with it.”52
More important, Bass’s titles allowed product differentiation for individual films. This was a must after the Paramount Consent Decree in 1948,
which required films to be sold to theaters individually and based on their
own merit, rather than as part of a studio package. In the latter case, theater owners had to take only the films offered by a studio’s distribution
arm, making it more important to brand the studio than the individual

40

Designer and Filmmaker
film. It was the independent producers, rather than studio publicity
departments, who first understood the ramifications of this change.
While Bass’s simple flickering flame and clean graphics for Carmen
Jones impressed critics, it was his title sequence for Preminger’s follow-up
film, The Man with the Golden Arm (1955), that really garnered attention.
Bass would go on to design every credit sequence for every Preminger
film between Saint Joan (1957) and Bunny Lake Is Missing (1965), including Porgy and Bess (1959), although his designs were not used. Bass’s
titles and ad campaigns for Bonjour Tristesse (1958), Anatomy of a Murder
(1959), Exodus (1960), and Advise and Consent (1962) were legendary,
and he contributed designs for posters, lobby cards, and other publicity
material as well. Bass also designed the cover for Preminger’s autobiography, although the idea to put the back of Preminger’s bald head on the
cover came from Herb Yager. The former president of the Academy of
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, Sid Ganis, started his career in the publicity department at 20th Century–Fox and, by the 1980s, was head of
worldwide publicity for Paramount. Ganis recalled that when Bass and
Preminger worked together, the director would give Bass numerous suggestions, which the designer would listen to quite seriously and even jot
down notes, promising to get to work on Preminger’s ideas right away.
Weeks later, when Bass presented his designs for the title sequence or the
publicity campaign, Preminger would remark with astonishment that his
ideas were nowhere to be seen, whereupon Bass would apologize and say
that he had tried, but they just hadn’t worked out. Bass had a slightly different take on working with the autocratic director. With regard to their
infamous verbal fisticuffs over the titles for The Man with the Golden Arm,
Bass noted: “I discovered that what we wound up with together was better than what I started with on my own. Otto was [a] very tough and bullheaded kind of person. . . . In a funny way it worked for me.”53
Another high-profile client was Alfred Hitchcock. Bass worked as a
visual consultant for Hitchcock while the director was producing his films
independently at Paramount. Bass designed the credit sequences for Vertigo (1958), North by Northwest (1959), and Psycho (1960), cementing his
reputation as a gifted auteur of titles, even if the megalomaniacal Hitchcock was unwilling to give the designer credit for his role in conceptualizing the shocking shower sequence. Bass created the storyboards and
designed the editing of the shower sequence, and he may have directed
some setups, but Hitchcock infamously downplayed Bass’s contribution,

41

SAUL BASS
characterizing Bass as a mere assistant he happened to humor.54 Meanwhile, in the 1960s Bass continued to design material for Preminger, Billy
Wilder, Robert Aldrich, Stanley Kramer, John Frankenheimer, Stanley
Kubrick, and other directors.
By the time Bass moved to his new offices, he had established himself
not only in the film world but also as one of the most important designers in the United States, a representative of what was called the modern
American style. He was designing houses in association with Buff, Straub
and Hensman Architects, hi-fi systems for Stephans Tru-Sonic, playgrounds for the Longwood Redevelopment Corporation, and floor and
wall tiles for Pomona Tile Company. He also expanded his corporate
identity and logo work, designing a new look for Speedway Petroleum
Company, which owned a chain of gasoline stations.55 A critic writing in
the prestigious Industrial Design, discussing how West Coast modernism
was suffusing American design, noted: “Equally at home in the abstract
world of ideas and the tangible world of the eye, Saul Bass has become
an undisputed leader in the western graphics world with work that is
fresh, lithe, charming, and free of the bonds of a single ‘style.’”56 Other
highbrow design journals, many of them published in Europe, concurred.57 Another sign of Bass’s public recognition was the number of
prizes he began to amass for his work: in 1957–1958 he won the National
Society of Art Directors’ Art Director of the Year Award, the New York
Art Directors Club Gold Medal, a San Francisco Art Directors Club
medal, and a Los Angeles Art Directors Club medal and several other
awards.58
In 1955 the corporate rebranding work for Speedway Petroleum got
Bass involved in making television commercials for the company, an experience that would serve him well in terms of both editing film for titles and
directing short industrial films. Two years later, Bass made commercials
for Blitz beer and National Bohemian beer, followed in the 1960s by
Rainier beer. Some of these beer commercials consisted of only a couple
of shots, but the “Andy Parker regular Joe” series for National Bohemian
beer followed a white-collar worker from the office to his local bar, where
he enjoyed a cold brew as he relaxed after work.59 Bass produced the titles
for Frank Sinatra’s first television program, The Frank Sinatra Show
(1957), which also involved creating a television promo; a year later he
directed promos for ABC Television’s fall lineup. Commercials for Chevrolet, Dixie Cup, Mattel, Rayovac, RCA, Olin Mathieson, Bridgestone

42

Designer and Filmmaker
tires, and others would follow, but his masterpiece is undoubtedly his
Mennen Baby Magic commercial (1962), for which he won the grand
prize at the Cannes Advertising Film Festival.60
From there, it was only a short step to corporate and industrial films.
In fact, Bass was highly successful in finding corporate financing for his
work, even when the films were more educational than commercial and
did not advertise a company’s products. In 1961 he produced a short
animated film for a Stan Freberg television special, The Sale of Manhattan, which showcased Bass’s typically urbane, Jewish humor. In 1962
Bass designed Apples and Oranges for CBS Television, a promotional film
that was intended to convince clients that television commercials were
more effective than print advertising.61 In addition, Bass may have collaborated with Ray Bradbury, Jules Engel, and Herb Klynn on the Oscarnominated animated film Icarus Mongolfier Wright (1962).62 The same
year, he produced a series of infomercials for IBM, including one on
using computers for cancer research and another humorous animated
piece on “Why Computers Are Good”—a mini-version of the history of
invention he produced for Why Man Creates. Two Bass-directed short
films were released in 1964: From Here to There for United Airlines and
The Searching Eye for the Eastman Kodak Company, which were screened
at the New York World’s Fair in the Transportation and Travel and the
Kodak Pavilion, respectively.63 His next short, Why Man Creates (1968),
was sponsored by Kaiser Aluminum; it won an Academy Award and, like
the previous films, concerned both the act of seeing and the production
of art. Other corporate projects followed: an untitled AT&T corporate
identity film (1969); One Hundred Years of the Telephone (1977), an animated film for AT&T; and Windows (1977) for Warner Communications
(later retitled Notes on the Popular Arts). Meanwhile, Bass also became a
montage expert, much as Slavko Vorkapich had been a generation earlier.
He created either storyboards or actual film sequences for Psycho, Spartacus, West Side Story, The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, and Grand Prix
and consulted on Apocalypse Now (1974).64 Two films for the educational market followed: Bass on Titles (1978), in which Bass discusses his
by-then legendary film title sequences, and The Solar Film (1980),
financed by Robert Redford’s Wildwood Productions to advocate the
development of solar energy sources.
Bass’s interest in social issues had led him to develop a forty-minute
film in the late 1960s about modernity’s impact on human society, to be

43

SAUL BASS
called Notes on Change. He was hoping to find the kind of enlightened
corporate sponsorship that had made Why Man Creates possible; in other
words, even in the absence of direct advertising for the company, the film
“could reflect corporate responsibility and sensitivity just by the fact of
sponsorship.” Unfortunately, the project was preempted when Alvin
Toffler’s best seller Future Shock was published eight months into Bass’s
preproduction work, apparently leading to the project’s demise.65 The
script was written by Mayo Simon, the cowriter of Why Man Creates; he
would go on to script Bass’s science fiction feature film Phase IV (1974),
which takes its cues from The Hellstrom Chronicles (1971) and other ecological disaster movies, although it is much more thoughtful than some
other epigones. Phase IV tells the story of mutated ants that have evolved
into highly intelligent beings with the ability to coordinate mass attacks
on civilization. The film was mishandled by Paramount, its distributor,
and the advertising was targeted toward the horror-film audience. Most
critics agree, however, that it was an intelligent experiment more akin to
a European art film than a grind-house exploitation horror film, and it
suffered from weak dialogue and acting. Even before Bass’s original ending—a free-form phantasmagoria of images—was rediscovered, the film
had achieved cult status, yet it was a financial loser in 1974, failing to
recoup its expenses (but only barely). The film ended Bass’s career as a
Hollywood feature filmmaker, although that was not immediately apparent. In an interview published in September 1975, Bass still expressed
optimism about future film projects: “Frankly, I’m looking to the future
with great excitement. There are so many stories that need telling.”66
Three years later, he was still looking for a feature film project, noting in
the trades, “It is hard to find properties.”67
Elaine and Saul Bass codirected another short science fiction film,
Quest (1983). It was based on “Frost and Fire,” an original story by Ray
Bradbury, who also supplied the script. With a production budget of
approximately $1 million, the film was financed by M. Okada International Association. Despite winning numerous prizes at American film festivals, the film was not commercially released in the United States,
probably due to resistance from the Japanese financiers, although it was
distributed nontheatrically.68
Meanwhile, in 1974 Bass hired marketing expert Herb Yager, a onetime partner in Alan Landsburg Productions. Yager eventually became a
full partner, and the firm’s name was changed in September 1978 to Saul

44

Designer and Filmmaker
Bass/Herb Yager & Associates.69 Over the years, Bass had considered
bringing in other partners, including Lou Dorfsman, who stated: “I went
into business with Saul Bass three times, seriously, with lawyers and everything, but as you can see, [I] never actually picked up and left [CBS].”70
The firm’s reorganization was precipitated by the fact that the business
was just limping along. Bass had been undercharging for his services, and
finances were apparently a mess, especially after Bass spent at least two
years almost exclusively on Phase IV. Yager shifted the focus to the more
lucrative corporate identity campaigns, and he apparently succeeded in
putting the business in order, as reflected by his promotion to partner.
The same sense of aesthetic minimalism that had influenced Bass’s posters
and graphic designs now came into play in the design of corporate logos
for United Airlines, AT&T, United Way, Alcoa, Dixie Paper, Rockwell
International, Quaker Oats, Lawry’s Seasoning, the Girl Scouts, the
YWCA, and Warner Communications. Many of these logos are still
instantly recognizable by most ordinary Americans. Bass earned large
sums for these corporate logos and for the corporate identity campaigns,
which involved designing everything from gas station fuel pumps to uniforms. However, Bass’s studio also worked pro bono, designing many
posters for the Academy Awards as well as artwork for film festivals, art
exhibitions, social action causes, and the like, thus giving expression to his
sense of social responsibility.
In the late 1980s Bass made his Hollywood comeback. A younger
generation of filmmakers, including Martin Scorsese, Steven Spielberg,
and James L. Brooks, appreciated his title designs of thirty years earlier
and now wanted a similar look for their own films.71 Scorsese, in particular, admired Bass’s work with Hitchcock and Preminger and would
encourage Bass and company to achieve new heights in title design with
Goodfellas (1990), Cape Fear (1991), Age of Innocence (1993), and
Casino (1995). Elaine Bass received equal credit on these titles, and her
influence is clearly visible. Casino was Bass’s last credited work. He died
of non-Hodgkin’s lymphoma at Cedars-Sinai Medical Center in Los
Angeles on 25 April 1976, shortly before his seventy-sixth birthday. By
then, he and Elaine had sold the company to Citigate (a UK public relations firm with global connections—now Citigate Dewe Rogerson), but
Bass Yager Citigate, as it was called, was not sustainable without Saul.
Unlike advertising firms, which establish brands that long outlive their
founders (e.g., J. Walter Thompson), design firms are too focused on the

45

SAUL BASS
talents and personality of the designer-owner to survive the founder’s
demise.72

The Bauhaus and 1950s American Design
In the mid-1940s Bass came under the spell of Bauhaus design philosophies, as communicated in two seminal books: Moholy-Nagy’s The New
Vision: From Material to Architecture and Gyorgy Kepes’s The Language
of Vision. Bass imbibed the lessons of the Bauhaus aesthetic and applied
them to American commercial art design in his subsequent work. MoholyNagy and Kepes were Hungarians, the latter a student and close collaborator of the former in Berlin from 1930 to 1932, when they both worked
at the Bauhaus. Along with other Bauhaus alumni, their influence on
post–World War II American design is incalculable.
The Bauhaus was established in Weimar in 1919 as a state-operated
institution of higher learning for architecture and other related arts. Architect Walter Gropius was its first director and gave the arts and crafts school
its name. In April 1919 Gropius published the Bauhaus manifesto, which
featured a woodcut by Lyonel Feininger on its title page. Gropius called
for an end to distinctions between high and low art: “Let us therefore create a new guild of craftsmen without the class-distinctions that raise an
arrogant barrier between craftsmen and artists! Let us desire, conceive,
and create the new building of the future together.”73 Architecture, typography, carpentry, metalwork, weaving, sculpture, wall painting, and theater design all had workshops at the Bauhaus, since art was not just an
object for ruling-class patronage; it was meant to embrace all aspects of
human interaction. Furthermore, through the workshop method, Bauhaus professors taught that each real-world design problem had its own
solution based on specific social and economic conditions, and that strict
adherence to a design ideology was counterproductive. Such pragmatism
fit seamlessly into the emerging ideology of the postwar visual communications industry in America, which understood itself to be in the service
of consumer capitalism. Jettisoned in a process of transatlantic acculturation were the more radical ideological underpinnings of the Bauhaus
design aesthetic, leaving formalist design principles: “The European modernists and their American counterparts found clients who were willing to
put the theories into practice for commercial use; there was neither time
nor necessity for the manifestos or ideology that had characterized the

46

Designer and Filmmaker
movement in Europe. Even clients such as the Container Corporation of
America, which patronized modern design in part because of the progressive social values it held, were doing so primarily because of the forward
looking image they could achieve by associating themselves with contemporary art.”74 One can imagine that such an aesthetic would also appeal to
a young designer slaving away in the movie advertising business but with
higher aspirations.
Historians agree that many of the most influential designers of the
twentieth century taught or studied at the Bauhaus. In architecture, there
was Gropius himself, as well as Mies van der Rohe; in interior and furniture design, Marcel Breuer became a household name; and Herbert Bayer
became a master of graphic design and photography. Moholy-Nagy did it
all—painting, photography, sculpture, architecture, typographic design,
bookmaking, and film. Oskar Schlemmer was synonymous with revolutionary theater design, Anni Albers and Gunta Stölzl developed the new
field of textile design, and Marianne Brandt and Wilhelm Wagenfeld forever changed product design. Famous photographers included Lux and
Lyonel Feininger, Heinz Loew, Lucia Moholy, Walter Peterhans, Joost
Schmidt, and Otto Umbehr (Umbo). Working alongside them were
some of the greatest artists of the century, including Paul Klee, Josef
Albers, and Wassily Kandinsky. The Bauhaus continued to operate until
1933, when the Nazis shut it down as a bastion of degenerate art. However, it underwent numerous changes over the years of its existence—geographic (moving from Weimar to Dessau in 1925 and then to Berlin in
1932), institutional (Hannes Meyer became director in 1928, Ludwig
Mies van der Rohe in 1930, and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy in 1932), and philosophical (evolving from a focus on painting to the incorporation of all
the other arts, and from limited aesthetic concerns to greater community
engagement). Some of these changes were brought about by the continual controversies and scandals generated by the institution; some were the
result of mounting political pressures from the conservative and Nazi factions of the ideological spectrum; and others were caused by internal
strife, such as the complaints of women students that they were being
herded into weaving and ceramics workshops.
Born in Bacsborosod, Hungary, in 1895, Laszlo Moholy-Nagy was
trained as a lawyer but became a self-taught artist. After a brief foray into
writing and poetry, he took up painting shortly before the end of World
War I. Once he was demobilized from the army in 1918, Moholy-Nagy

47

SAUL BASS
finished his law degree in Budapest but soon became interested in art production, joining the constructivist-influenced left-wing group MA, for
which he wrote articles and manifestos. Although he was probably not
directly involved in the Hungarian Soviet Republic of Bela Kuhn in 1919,
Moholy-Nagy followed most of MA’s members into exile when that
short-lived government gave way to a fascist dictatorship. From Vienna,
where MA regrouped, Moholy-Nagy moved in 1920 to Berlin, which was
evolving into one of the most cosmopolitan cities in Europe. That same
year, he attended the first Dadaist congress in Berlin and became friends
with such leading Dadaists as Hannah Höch and Hans Richter. As the
German representative of MA, Moholy-Nagy nurtured contacts with Van
Doesburg and De Stijl in Holland, Karl Teige and the Czech Devestil
group in Prague, and Alexander Rodchenko and the Soviet productivists
in Moscow. Although, as movements, Constructivism (in its Soviet and
Hungarian manifestations), Dadaism, Suprematism, Productivism, and
Neoplasticism displayed somewhat different national and ideological
characteristics, they had much in common, especially in their modernist
fragmentation.
In spring 1923, Moholy-Nagy was awarded a professorship at the
Bauhaus, initially replacing Johannes Itten in the metallurgy workshop.
However, he soon became a significant force in all aspects of the school,
teaching the basic introductory course that all first-year students had to
complete, where he insisted that art and design must meet the needs of a
modern industrial society. His published books in the Bauhaus series—
The Theatre of the Bauhaus (No. 4, 1925), Painting, Photography, Film
(No. 8, 1925), and The New Vision: From Material to Architecture (No.
14, 1929)—became hugely influential. All of them were republished
numerous times, and The New Vision eventually morphed into Vision in
Motion (1947), which was republished posthumously by his wife, Lucia
Moholy.75
Born in Selyp, Hungary, in 1906, Gyorgy Kepes graduated from the
Budapest Royal Academy of Arts in 1928. He decided to give up painting
for film after falling under the influence of the Hungarian left-wing poet
and painter Lajos Kassak. Kepes gravitated to Berlin, where he designed
the cover for Rudolf Arnheim’s seminal work on film theory, Film as Art.
Knowing that Moholy-Nagy had written for Kassak’s publications, Kepes
wrote to the master and was invited to join his workshop in 1929, where
he remained until 1932. At the time, Moholy-Nagy had just completed

48

Designer and Filmmaker
his first avant-garde film and was working on others, including Berlin
Still-Life (1931) and Gypsies (1932), both of which not only experimented
with new cinematic devices but also actively critiqued existing political
and social conditions.76 The artistic collaborators later reconnected in
London, where both had emigrated to flee the Nazis.
In 1937 Moholy-Nagy invited Kepes to run the Color and Light
Department at the New Bauhaus in Chicago, sponsored by industrialist
and philanthropist Walter Paepcke. After its failure in 1938, the school
morphed into the Institute of Design, where Kepes stayed until 1943. He
was recruited that year by Serge Chermayeff, who had begun to transform
the Art Department of Brooklyn College after his appointment as chair in
1942. Chermayeff had previously been associated with Kepes and MoholyNagy when he lectured at the Institute of Design in 1941. At Brooklyn
College, the renowned Russian-born, London-educated architect invested
the curriculum with ideas central to the Bauhaus movement, noting that
“a liberal arts education could play an important part in restoring art to its
proper relationship with contemporary life by developing a sense of reality
and responsibility with a free creative and critical capacity.”77 Environmental design was part of the curriculum for all art students, who were
encouraged to apply their aesthetic talents to the urban environment of
Brooklyn. In 1946, at the recommendation of Walter Gropius, Chermayeff became Moholy-Nagy’s successor at the Institute of Design in
Chicago, while Kepes moved to the Massachusetts Institute of Technology. He remained there until 1974 and established the Center for
Advanced Studies in 1967.
Although the Bauhaus influence was cut short in Germany due to the
rise of National Socialism and the school’s closing in 1933, Bauhaus faculty and alumni had a seismic impact on American art, architecture, and
especially design. Moholy-Nagy’s huge sphere of influence in Chicago
included Marli Ehrman, who headed the Weaving Workshop at the Institute of Design, and Hin Bredendieck, who later became director for
industrial design at George Tech. Other notables included architect Mies
van der Rohe, after his immigration to Chicago; Walter Gropius and Marcel Breuer at the Harvard Graduate School of Design, where they trained
Philip Johnson, I. M. Pei, Lawrence Halprin, and Paul Randolph; Naum
Gabo at Harvard’s School of Architecture; Werner Drewes in the Art
Department at Columbia University; Josef and Anni Albers, as well as
Trude Guermonprez, at Black Mountain College; Herbert Beyer at the

49

SAUL BASS
Aspen Institute; and Will Burtin at Fortune Magazine. In addition, a
number of former Bauhaus artists became American artists, including Lux
and Lyonel Feininger, Wassily Kandinsky, Piet Mondrian, and Paul Klee.
The influence of the Bauhaus on American design went far beyond
the personal connections between these artists and their American students. Three central Bauhaus ideas were easily translated into the American idiom because they seamlessly conformed to American conceptions of
pragmatic problem solving, an ideological free-trade zone in the arts, and
Taylorist notions of industrial efficiency and time management. First, the
Bauhaus emphasized utilitarian art production in order to reverse the perception of manufacturing and its products as soulless and ugly; design had
to be elegant and close to everyday life. Second, the Bauhaus sought to
reunite intellectual pursuits and aesthetic theory with practical skills; the
Bauhaus artists saw themselves as craftspersons solving the problems of a
modern industrial society. The old hierarchy of the arts, which placed
painting and fine art above all, was considered obsolete and inadequate
for the twentieth century. Finally, the Bauhaus workshop system, which
privileged experimentation not for its own sake but to solve real-world
problems, became a model for art education at American universities in
the post–World War II era. Is there any better way to describe Bass’s own
view of himself than as a craftsperson solving the problems of society?
It is not an exaggeration to state that the very concept of a graphic
designer embracing the mechanization of image production came from
the Bauhaus. At that ground zero, the new profession’s identity began to
evolve, culminating in the field’s establishment through such organizations as the Art Directors Club of America. Many Bauhaus designers, but
especially Moholy-Nagy, privileged the process of “selecting, editing, creating in the mind, rather than producing with the hand.”78 Saul Bass
would embrace all these ideas, even if he was not necessarily conscious of
or willing to acknowledge their origins. In the Bass studio, the hand could
be that of Saul, as in Why Man Creates, or it could be that of Art Goodman or a number of other designers, but the intellectual process of selecting, editing, and creating the Bass look was Saul’s alone.

Moholy-Nagy and Kepes: Point, Line, Circle
Bass’s incredible success as a designer was due in no small part to his ability to take the Bauhaus philosophy and its design conceptions and trans-

50

Designer and Filmmaker
late them into a working method that yielded a consistent brand and look
while communicating simple, direct messages for his clients. For Bass,
reading the Bauhaus texts gave his design work a new, deeper level of
meaning, beyond the immediate objective of creating an advertisement to
sell a product. As Catherine Sullivan notes in an early piece on Bass, the
Bauhaus emphasis on art as experience, its melding of art theory and practice, and its insistence that art, science, and technology are not mutually
exclusive but intermingled spoke volumes to the young designer.79 Bass
suddenly understood that even the most crass commercial ventures, like
film advertising, could benefit from good design solutions. He was probably also impressed by the Bauhaus attitude toward technology, which
viewed technological progress as a positive expansion of human sensory
perception rather than a dehumanizing element in society. Trained from
the ground up as an apprentice designer with little academic background,
Bass must have felt validated by Moholy-Nagy’s and Kepes’s belief that
the boundaries between high art and popular or commercial art should be
negligible, at least in terms of their aesthetic value.
Furthermore, Bass embraced the idea that we human beings are the
sum of our learned experiences and that human communication through
art, design, and literature is what makes us human. As Moholy-Nagy
notes in The New Vision: “Everyone is equipped by nature to receive and
assimilate sensory experiences. Everyone is sensitive to tones and colors,
has sure touch and space relations, etc. This means that by nature everyone is able to participate in all the pleasures of sensory experiences.” Later
in that same text, he formulates the link between art and communication
even more precisely: “It (art) is the most intimate language of the senses,
a direct linking of man to man.”80 Moholy-Nagy repeatedly implies that
the most efficient forms of human communication are rooted in biology,
in forms that tap directly into the human psyche and are experienced
physiologically rather than through the intellect. Moholy-Nagy speaks of
biology (nature) interacting with technology (mechanical manipulation)
to create functional solutions to design problems (because these are closest to the possibilities inherent in the natural form). Such notions must
have been very appealing to Bass, who also cultivated a strong humanistic
impulse and later seemingly gravitated from material concerns to more
mystical ones.
American advertisers had already accepted Harold Laswell’s theory of
stimulus-response, which postulated that the consuming public was recep-

51

SAUL BASS
tive to certain stimuli that could elicit a specific response, ultimately leading to the purchase of goods. But exactly how that worked remained
unclear. The New Vision provided practical answers for Bass, just as it had
profoundly influenced Paul Rand by theorizing that design was subject to
order and a system.81 In particular, Bass embraced Moholy-Nagy’s dictum
that each new work demanded a specific set of design solutions in order
to achieve maximum functionality as an object whose purpose was to
communicate meaning. Design was therefore based on practical solutions
inherent in the material, rather than on abstract, theoretical principles.
Like many American designers, Bass adopted the formal principles of
clean, uncluttered design based on sans serif type and basic geometric
shapes (intended to communicate modernity and a contemporary feel to
postwar consumers) and jettisoned the theory. In interviews, Bass was
always loath to articulate the theories underlying his work. He would concede that his method of work was reductionist rather than expansive, paring down elements to their most essential function rather than adding
superfluous ornamentation, which is a central concept in Moholy-Nagy’s
book.82
Of particular help to Bass in terms of analyzing specific design problems and solutions was Moholy-Nagy’s breakdown of the materials used
in the design process into four elements: structure, texture, surface aspect,
and massing (mass arrangement). Structure pertains to the physical characteristics of the material—for instance, fibers for paper and cloth, and
grain for wood. Texture helps the designer understand the look and feel
of design materials on the surface. Surface aspect differs from texture in
that it is subject to manipulation by the artist—for example, a metal’s texture may be hard and smooth, but an artist’s hammer can create patterns
on the surface that change the texture. Massing, according to MoholyNagy, has to do with the arrangement of surface treatments in groups.83
Overall, The New Vision’s illustrations probably exerted the most
influence on Bass. All of Moholy-Nagy’s books feature a montage of brief,
almost telegraphed texts in juxtaposition to images, with many pages consisting exclusively of images. The photographic images in The New Vision
must have been a never-ending source of inspiration for Bass, because his
later designs abound with similarities. As an intuitive and visual learner,
Bass assimilated the photographic illustrations in both The New Vision and
Kepes’s The Language of Vision, understanding them not merely as illustrations of theoretical concepts but, more importantly, as powerful visual

52

Designer and Filmmaker
designs to be filed away in his own personal catalog for future use. One
particularly striking example is a view from an airplane that shows the
structure of a mountain range, which Moholy-Nagy calls a “macrophotograph” because it reveals the large-scale relationships of geographic formations.84 Though two-dimensional, the photograph reveals through
light, density, color, and form a geology that is otherwise hidden to the
human eye situated, as it were, on the earth’s surface. That image could
have been the template for the infinite variety of geologic structures seen
from the sky in Bass’s film From Here to There (1964). It also figures
prominently in The Searching Eye (1964), where the filmmaker positively
revels in the landscape’s changing colors, tones, and textures, and again in
Bass’s introductory sequence for NBC: The First 50 Years (1976). Another
example of such inspiration can be found in the manipulated photographic image of an elevator shaft by O. Firle (1928), which uses multiple
exposures to create a spiral effect that sucks the eye into the black vortex
of the image. Did Bass have that photograph in mind when he created the
graphic Lissajous form design for Vertigo, whose hero has a paranoid fantasy of falling down the stairs of a church tower?
Despite Moholy-Nagy’s influence, the core concepts of Bass’s work as
a designer originated more directly from his declared mentor Gyorgy
Kepes and his seminal book on the theory of art, The Language of Vision.
Kepes articulated Bauhaus principles that had previously been wedded to
theories of Gestalt psychology. Both Kandinsky and Klee had incorporated Gestalt theories in their basic Bauhaus courses, including the notion
of the whole being greater than the sum of its parts. Utilizing the senses
to decode a purely visual language was also central to Kepes’s aesthetics,
as articulated in Language of Vision. The language of line, shape, and
color is perceived as a system of visual communication that is analogous to
written language, based on the human ability of perception. Art is seen
not as a matter of “artistic” inspiration but as a discipline governed by scientific principles that can be articulated, the production of art as a matter
of experience, and the perception of formal order. According to Gestalt
psychology, the whole, whether in art or in nature, is composed of an
interrelationship of its constituent parts, whereby the whole is always
more than the sum of its parts. As a result, according to Kepes, “The
experience of an image is a creative act of integration. Its essential characteristic is that by plastic power an experience is formed into an organic
whole.”85 Kepes, in fact, expressly acknowledges his indebtedness to

53

SAUL BASS
Gestalt psychologist Max Wertheimer and his assistants Kurt Koffka and
Wolfgang Kohler at the beginning of Language of Vision.
As early as 1938, Kepes outlined his goals for his design students: “As
the eye is the agent of conveying all impressions to the mind, the achieving of visual communication requires a fundamental knowledge of the
means of visual expression. Development of this knowledge will generate
a genuine ‘language of the eye,’ whose ‘sentences’ are created images and
whose elements are the basic signs, line, plane, halftone gradation, color,
etc.”86 What Kepes offered Bass was heady stuff. Language of Vision posits
not only an international language based solely on the visual, on a system
of signs and significations in images, but also a scientific worldview of art.
Ironically, Gestaltists today no longer propagate a physiological theory
undergirding the biological origins of Gestalt thinking, but it is unclear to
what degree Bass believed or even perceived these pseudoscientific elements of Gestalt theory. As he later admitted, he didn’t really understand
Kepes’s book: “Now, I didn’t understand the book, but I knew it was the
answer. I knew it was the word. It was very vague, for me, and very
ambiguous and very mysterious.”87 In fact, Bass internalized Kepes’s philosophy and declared it intuition—which it was, up to a point, given its
naturalization within Bass’s worldview.
As a strategy for facilitating communication, Kepes’s Gestalt provided
both simple and direct instructions for communicating, as well as a methodology for distilling complexity into hieroglyphics. Bass’s lifelong fascination with Egyptology added the emotional kick. This was undoubtedly
a powerful tool in the hands of an American designer whose clients sought
intuitive methods of persuasion to harness the inchoate nature of audience desire. Bass admitted that his design work after his exposure to Kepes
became “more dynamic and more abstract.”88
There seems to be a clear contradiction, then, between the influence
of Bauhaus theories and proscriptions, as clearly evidenced by the dramatic turn in Bass’s work after his involvement with Kepes, and his later
assertions that his work was intuitive and there were no rules. In point of
fact, it is likely that Bass assimilated images and concepts from Kepes and
Moholy-Nagy to the point that they became second nature and therefore
seemed “intuitive” to the designer. Bass probably also sympathized with
Kepes and other Bauhaus practitioners because of his humanistic-Jewish
background. All the practitioners of Gestalt were optimistic, liberal, and
largely the product of a German-Jewish symbiosis. They were literally

54

Designer and Filmmaker
transplanted from Weimar to the New World, and those left behind perished in the Shoah. The Bauhaus ideology incorporated a strong sense of
social responsibility, making it all the more appealing to a kid from the
Bronx who had seen and experienced the poverty of the Depression. Most
important in terms of Kepes’s influence on Bass, Language of Vision’s final
chapters explicate the way the idioms of modern painting can be translated into the medium of advertising. Not being hamstrung by traditional
forms, advertising can employ the most heterogeneous elements—
whether through language, graphics, photography, or abstract shapes—to
communicate meaning: “Posters on the streets, picture magazines, picture books, container labels, window displays . . . could disseminate
socially useful messages, and they could train the eye, and thus the mind,
with the necessary discipline of seeing beyond the surface of visible
things.”89
Kepes changed everything for Bass because The Language of Vision
offered practical design solutions that Bass applied to his commercial
work. Kepes taught Bass that the visual field of any design consists of
objects placed in space, where color, brightness, texture, size, and the
relationship of points, lines, and areas create spatial forces that interact
with the background. The eye assimilates these various spatial forces and
organizes their visual differences into a whole. But again, what may have
impressed Bass more than the concepts were the illustrations, which demonstrate how impactful isolated visual elements such as squares, circles,
and lines can be on a blank, white page.90 These geometric shapes not
only manifest dynamic movement by creating actual force fields, depending on their placement, but also become powerful tools in guiding the eye
toward the design’s most important message.
According to Gestalt psychology, as explained by Kepes, several laws
are at work in this process of perceiving the “plastic image”: the law of
proximity or nearness, which groups elements together when they are
placed close by; the law of continuance, which groups elements along a
line or progression; the law of closure, whereby the eye may add invisible elements to complete a regular figure; the law of symmetry, which
privileges figure-ground relationships; and the law of common fate, by
which elements moving in the same direction are perceived collectively.91
All other aspects of Kepes’s design theory flow from these principles,
which are based on the active perception and assimilation of visual data
by the viewer: “The final task of plastic organization is, then, the cre-

55

SAUL BASS
ation of an optical structure of movement that will dictate the direction
and progression of plastic relationships until the experience reaches full
integration.”92
Just how well Bass absorbed these lessons can be demonstrated by
comparing Kepes’s illustration of the varying placement of squares within
rectangles in The Language of Vision with Bass’s trade journal invitation to
the premiere of All About Eve (1950) at Grauman’s Chinese Theatre in
Hollywood. The latter diagonally stacks white rectangles for the invitation, envelope, and tickets, respectively, on a black background, while a
less obtrusive red sans serif type above announces “the motion picture
event of the year.”93 Or, as Bass admitted to Douglas Bell, the trade advertisement for Return to Paradise (1953) was “a Bauhaus ad, absolutely
inappropriate for the subject, but it tells you how obsessive I was about
the whole thing.”94 In another example, “Equation,” images of a script +
studio/location + director = movie; it transitions from Bauhaus ideograms to large rectangular blocks of text that form the horizontal base for
the vertical tower of images and math.
While the first section of Kepes’s book concerns the plastic organization of the image, the next section falls under the heading of visual representation, which “operates by means of a sign system based upon a
correspondence between sensory stimulations and the visible structure of
the real world.”95 Kepes theorizes that it becomes the designer’s task to
find correspondences between spatial relationships in reality and those on
the two-dimensional page to signify meaning. Thus, in medieval paintings, there was a direct relationship between the size of objects and their
importance and power; this relationship was destroyed with the institutionalization of a Renaissance perspective, only to be reestablished in
modernist art. Kepes advocates a movement away from the single, closed
perspective of the vanishing point on the horizon to either a linear perspective that opens space for the beholder in all directions or multiple,
even overlapping perspectives that reflect the many subjectivities of viewers assimilating the image: “The image became once more a dynamic
space experience instead of a dead inventory of optical facts.”96
One of the most important concepts Bass took away from his reading
of The Language of Vision was the notion of reduction and simplicity. It
was a key concept in what would become the Bass brand and one that
Bass repeatedly referenced in interviews. Kepes develops his argument for
simplicity and intensity by noting that the modern urban environment

56

Designer and Filmmaker
represents an overabundance of visual stimulation and a “turmoil of
events.” Because the human attention span is too short, it becomes necessary to pare down details to their essential shape and meaning. Like a traffic signal on a busy city street, the designed message must be direct,
simple, and intense.97 Bass often spoke of his own reductive point of view,
his preference for simplification of design rather than layered complexity.
His increasing use of logo-like, reductive metaphorical images, especially
after the success of the first Otto Preminger campaigns, was the direct
result of his intuitive understanding of what was necessary for effective
modern product advertising, given the plethora of conflicting messages
bombarding the consumer.
This reduction of sensory perception engages the subjectivity of the
consumer—an absolute must for successful advertising. According to
Kepes’s final section on “dynamic iconography,” visual experience is much
more than a bundle of sensory stimulants working on the eye and ear;
rather, these visual sensations are imbricated with human memory and
subjectivity.98 The more generalized an iconic image becomes, the better
it engages with the subject’s memory of other similar objects. Just as multiple perspectives invalidated the one-dimensional perspective of postRenaissance art, the new freedom achieved through plastic organization
allows for multiple meanings, releasing “associative energies inherent in
every visible fragment of reality.”99
Finally, Kepes sees advertising as a perfect playing field for “testing
representational images in combination with pure plastic units and verbal
elements.”100 Kepes peppers his book with illustrations of modern paintings, photographs, architecture, and design, as well as examples of dynamic
advertising. Modern American designers represented in The Language of
Vision include Lester Beall, Joseph Binder, Will Burtin, Joseph Feher,
Morton Goldsholl, and Ladislav Sutnar. I suspect that Bass studied these
illustrations from the advertising world with particular intensity. For
example, Kepes demonstrates how the fixed Renaissance perspective of
traditional art can be transformed into multiple perspectives by cutting up
an image and reassembling it on an open field, allowing the eye to fill in
the missing information to create a dynamic whole. Kepes illustrates this
principle with two photomontages by M. Halberstadt and Clifford Eittel,
which undoubtedly inspired Bass’s photomontage in an innovative trade
advertisement for Attack! (1956), which announces the completion of
principal photography with three words placed in a zigzag pattern in the

57

SAUL BASS
spaces between image fragments.101 Bass would use the technique repeatedly, including in some of his designs for Anatomy of a Murder and possibly in a trade advertisement for Red Skelton on CBS Radio as early as
1951.102
A Paul Rand advertisement from 1941 illustrates Kepes’s discussion
of the relative size of objects in any design. Several more Rand designs
appear later in the book, one of which is visually juxtaposed with a Picasso
drawing. As we know, Bass watched Rand like a hawk, and the connection
between modernist art and advertising must have shocked Bass, who was
used to moving in the vulgar circles of movie trade advertising. Likewise,
an A. M. Cassandre advertisement from 1937 for Container Corporation
of America (Walter Paepcke’s company) is visually juxtaposed with a
Braque still life. Kepes also includes his own advertisement for Container
Corporation of America—a 1938 image of a disembodied hand in motion
that would become a key image in Bass’s own catalog of iconography. A
photomontage for Herbert Bayer’s 1939 design class (of another disembodied hand) became the inspiration for one version of Bass’s trade advertisement for Decision before Dawn (1951), and E. McKnight Kauffer’s
painting The Early Bird (1919) became the template for the birds in flight
depicted on Bass’s Keio Department Store wrapping paper.103 Indeed,
Saul Bass became a brand not only because he used a limited canon of stylistic devices but also because he created a catalog of iconographic images
and forms that appeared repeatedly across media and were recognized as
elements of the Saul Bass brand.

A Short History of Movie Advertising
Saul Bass’s ideal was to publicize something without actually selling a
product. According to Al Kallis, advertising work in the traditional movie
business didn’t appeal to Bass because he didn’t want to apply the hard
sell; his goal was to devise more creative campaigns that were themselves
works of art. “Bass wanted his label to be as important as the advertising
itself,” said Kallis.104 Bass therefore attempted to obtain funding for his
documentary projects from enlightened capitalist corporations that were
eager to have their names associated with a unique visual experience that
did almost anything except sell a tangible product. Bass would argue that
such films brought prestige to the company, enhancing its public identity.
Ironically, Bass cut his teeth on movie advertising, and it was during the

58

Designer and Filmmaker
time he spent slaving away as a lettering man on thousands of standard,
anonymously designed movie ads that Bass read Kepes and Moholy-Nagy
and began to dream of a different kind of work. Over a period of a decade,
Bass would experiment with new designs that ran the gamut from the
largely traditional, figurative ads common to the genre to very clean,
wholly modernist ads and other movie collateral, the latter produced
mostly for movie companies, directors, or actors rather than to advertise
individual films. Bass’s innovations must be contextualized within the history of Hollywood movie advertising. He made an impact because studio
advertising had stagnated for at least two decades.
Even though the invention of the movies and the “age of advertising”
occurred simultaneously, film industry advertising was initially limited to
film company names and movie genres. Programs of short films changed
multiple times a week, and cinema owners never knew in advance what
they would receive from the film exchange. Posters and handbills were the
earliest form of film publicity. Advertising in newspapers commenced in
the early 1910s, when film companies began to distribute prepared stories, photos, and ads to exhibitors for publication in local newspapers.105
After the narrative feature film became the dominant form of cinema
around 1915, advertisements in newspapers followed the lead of poster
designs, often replicating a single signature scene or image from the film:
John Wilkes Booth jumping from the balcony of the Ford Theatre in
Birth of a Nation (1915) or the ape and the girl on top of a skyscraper in
King Kong (1933). Although some advertisements actually included film
stills, most used specially created artwork featuring portraits of the stars.106
In fact, traditional movie advertising was made up almost entirely of penand-ink artwork and hand-lettered typography, as the use of halftone
reproductions had not yet been perfected.107
By the 1930s, however, pen-and-ink drawings had been almost wholly
supplanted by halftone photographs. Hollywood advertising was now a
riot of text, artwork, and photographs from the film or portraits of the
stars. Every square inch of the advertisement had to be filled with content:
at the bottom, small text replicating news stories; in the middle, visual
images, titles, and stars; at the top, the film’s tagline. Warner Brothers’
advertisement for So Big (1932), directed by William Wellman and starring Barbara Stanwyck, is typical. The ad’s most obvious design feature is
a sun pattern consisting of a circular portrait of Stanwyck, various artwork
depicting scenes from the film projecting outward like rays, and Stanwyck

59

SAUL BASS
and So Big on opposite sides of the orb. The film’s tagline, “For five years
. . .” appears above that, while the white space below is filled with a box
containing the names of ten actors in a column, the Warner Brothers
logo, Edna Ferber’s name in large, bold type, and a quasi–newspaper
story with movie factoids filling all the voids in between.108
As the 1930s and 1940s progressed, little changed in advertising
design, except that the typography and art for the film title was often
more innovative, conforming to the title design in the film credits.109 Furthermore, newspaper-style text was replaced with more images, and there
was less text overall. By the 1950s, text was limited to taglines, the title,
and the major stars and technical credits, but advertising designs were still
overloaded with content.
While Bass continued to design advertisements that resembled those
of his colleagues, he also experimented with open designs that left white
spaces on the page, limiting his visuals to one or two themes. His 1951
trade advertisement for Anatole Litvak’s World War II drama about a
sympathetic German deserter, Decision before Dawn, documents the
designer’s self-assuredness in implementing this principle. Employing
what Kallis called Bass’s mastery of scale, the photomontage emphasizes
giant hands as emblems of physical danger, while time is represented by
running bodies, thereby replicating a Kepes design principle involving
mass weight and spatial organization. Sullivan comments on the way the
Decision before Dawn ad conveys so simply the narrative of a chase in a
single two-dimensional space: isolating the tragic hero and overlaying
bureaucratic-looking stamps with the film title, thus visually communicating the character’s subjugation by the Schreibtischtäter (desk-bound perpetrators) of Nazi Germany.110 Interestingly, the ad published in American
Artist in 1954 is slightly less abstract than the version reproduced in Bass
and Kirkham’s 2011 biography: losing the grasping hands, the hero is
seen much closer in the foreground as well as in the extreme background,
connoting a temporal relationship between the two images; there is also a
village on the horizon, creating a visual cross with the hero’s temporal
image, while another space is visually filled with the official-looking
stamps. By the most economical visual means, Bass communicates the
essence of the film’s story.
Bass also experimented with Bauhaus design concepts in some of
the unsigned movie advertising he created for Howard Hughes and
RKO. For example, his trade advertisement for Hard, Fast, and Beauti-

60

Designer and Filmmaker
ful (1951), a film directed by Ida Lupino at RKO, is immediately recognizable as a Bauhaus-influenced design.111 Like The Champion ad
Bass designed for Stanley Kramer, the design concept here is open, featuring a mostly red canvas. Extending below is a visual arch made up of
three different monochromatic black images from the film, while the
words “HARD / FAST and / BEAUTIFUL” in white typewriter lettering cut over the lower end of the arch. All the other type is black or
gray and extremely small, so it almost bleeds into the background area.
The overall graphic impression resembles a large semicolon dominating
the picture surface, creating a downward movement that unites the
individual images of the film; the white text identifying the film floats
above these images but also stabilizes the visual field as a whole. Given
that all three images display female bodies, the film’s tagline—placed in
tiny black cursive handwriting below the white type “BEAUTIFUL”—
seemingly originates from the hand of the artist: “a story about women
. . . for men!” Bass specifically addresses the male audience because this
was a “woman’s melodrama” by a female director, so the female audience was already in the bag; the goal here was to expand the audience
to include their male dates. The meticulous attention to weight and
balance in the ad, with open spaces reserved for red fields of color,
would become hallmark features of the Bass brand, and a specific red
hue was ubiquitous.
But this move toward a cleaner style of advertising was not automatic; nor was it consistent. A number of movie advertisements from
the early 1950s seemingly conform to the Bass brand and give the
impression that Bass had completely abandoned the conventions of the
industry. However, these ads are not for individual films; they are generalized advertisements for production companies (Blaustein/Taradash), directors (Robert Aldrich), and actors (Jack Palance). In his
movie advertising work with Al Kallis between 1953 and 1957, one can
see that Bass is still struggling to break away from the industry’s figurative and realistic representations of a film’s visual elements in advertising. Kallis himself subscribed to that traditional aesthetic, although he
also worked on overtly modernist advertising campaigns for Bass, such
as his print ads for Quantas (1956) and Blitz beer (1957). Kallis also
drew both the fire and rose logo for Carmen and the hot pink rendition
of Dorothy Dandridge as Carmen featured on the poster and in much
of the advertising—a poster design Bass stopped taking credit for at

61

SAUL BASS
some point. Even in the advertising campaigns that are still heavily figurative (e.g., for The Racers, On the Threshold of Space, Mister Roberts, and
Magnificent Obsession), Bass restricts the number of images or scenes
depicted and integrates them into a larger, abstract design. One Bass ad
for Magnificent Obsession features a cut-up image (per Kepes), as did his
early No Way Out advertisement, but it also creates a montage of successive film frames. An ad for The Virgin Queen is dominated by a vertical
axis, consisting of a single illustration, and a horizontal axis of typography, with the film’s title anchoring the vertical axis. For A Star Is Born,
Bass plays with a logo of a star: it is at the center of one ad, with an illustration of Judy Garland inside; it appears in a much smaller version, with
only text inside, over a dominating scene of Garland in front of a theater
curtain; and it is used merely as a tiny silhouette logo, anchoring a pencil
drawing of Garland and James Mason. In another version, Bass jettisons
the logo altogether in favor of a star constructed of text in Broadway
lights. What all these advertisements have in common is a severe reduction in images and text compared with more conventional, ballyhoo
advertising; in addition, Bass is beginning to work out strategies for
implementing logos.
A 1955 trade advertisement for producer Benedict Bogeaus’s Pearl of
the South Pacific (which Bass was proud enough to publish in an early
article about himself, despite the film’s Saturday matinee ambitions) illustrates Bass’s ability not only to layer space in multiple planes on the page,
each carrying its own semantic weight, but also to create a narrative
through five separate panels.112 Later, I address the ad’s use of cinematic
montage in the Eisensteinian sense, but here I consider Bass’s equally
remarkable construction of spatial planes for a South Seas island relic and
objet d’art that must connote geography and generic narrative tropes yet
is isolated on a white background, emphasizing its museum quality, even
as the words “Technicolor” and “Superscope” take us back to the genre’s
guarantees. The photographed body parts seen in the five panels, along
with the narrative text, are likewise laid against a white background, isolating their physicality while emphasizing their function as visual signs.
Through text insertions on two other recurring planes, Bass develops narratives while simultaneously addressing the reader through graphic design
in multiple spaces: the museum, the cinema, the street (walking with a
date along Broadway).
Thus, Bass’s movie advertising work in the late 1940s and early 1950s

62

Designer and Filmmaker
became a testing ground for many of the design concepts culled from his
spiritual mentors Gyorgy Kepes and Laszlo Moholy-Nagy. Bass attempted
not only to unclutter the standard design practices of the day but also to
move away from figurative and photographic images, favoring instead
abstract, logo-like designs.

The Bass Brand: Simplicity, Rhythm, Balance, Repetition
Examining the work of Saul Bass & Associates (later Bass/Yager & Associates) over a fifty-year period, the consistency of the look is striking. This
is not to say that the design studio didn’t evolve over the decades to keep
up with modern design trends and technologies, but Bass understood
that brand identity was the key to his success. Like the companies for
which Bass created identifiable logos and corporate identities, like the
films for which Bass’s studio designed pithy images and introductions,
Bass’s own brand needed to be recognizable to potential clients. Such
branding not only differentiated his work from that of his competitors but
also garnered attention to the extent his designs deviated from the norms
and clichés of the day. Certainly, that was the lesson learned from early
unsigned movie advertisements such as those for The Champion, which
caused a sensation, according to Bass, because they looked so different
from conventional movie advertising.
Bass’s work displayed the characteristics that would become associated with his brand: strong graphic elements, modern typography, geometric ordering of the two-dimensional space on multiple spatial planes, a
limited color palette (either mostly primary colors or coordinated pastels),
and a simple iconographic element at its center. Bass used a catalog of
“house” images and pared down the cluttered, circus-sideshow look of
most movie ads. Other designers working at the major Hollywood studios
sought to catch the consumer’s eye with sensational images cribbed from
the film and reproduced photographically as major visual elements in an
overcrowded, typographic design scheme. In contrast, Bass incorporated
his absorption of modern art techniques—specifically, the concepts of
Bauhaus design—into his advertising work.
The first tenet of the evolving Bass brand, then, was simplicity of
expression. The visual field had to be open and uncluttered, allowing text
and images enough space to create a dynamic impression on the consumer that would communicate a clear message. The consumer’s mind

63

SAUL BASS
and eye would no longer be distracted by the noise of multiple messages
directed to diverse audiences; instead, there would be one direct and
unambiguous message intended to appeal to all audiences. Bass noted in
an interview after the release of Bonjour Tristesse: “The basic problem in
all kinds of design has been that everybody tries to say too much. You
have to say something simple, but something that moves people.”113 A
simple design with emotional appeal was the foundation of the Bass
brand. Graphic elements and text needed space within the frame’s visual
field to develop their own dynamic force, without conflicting with other
graphic elements and thus complicating the message. Another hallmark
of the Bass brand was the use of large fields of color (or lack of color) to
create an open space for the design elements within. Bass noted: “I tend
to simplification, looking for the one powerful, provocative image that
takes the notion of whatever you are trying to communicate and does
something to it, and forces you to exam it. And is sufficiently seductive
to pull you into it.”114
The notion of getting pulled into an image depended on the second
characteristic of the Bass brand—namely, the creation of dynamic rhythms
within the field of vision. Each design element, whether image, object, or
text, created a directional sense of movement through the act of reading.
While the open field of color created the prerequisite for the design element to develop its dynamic force, that force had to be seen in relation
to other forces within the field, creating the image’s overall rhythm. It
was here that the message gained its emotional effectiveness. Such emotive and dynamic rhythms would become extremely important in Bass’s
film title work, as well as a guiding principle in the way he edited films;
however, they were also important considerations in his graphic designs.
For example, a trade advertisement for Robert Aldrich’s Vera Cruz
(1954) features the legs, hips, and elongated shadow of a gunslinger facing a rival in a shoot-out; the legs and shadow slice the oblong background diagonally, creating a strong sense of instability and movement.
Denying the reader the identity of the human depicted also instills a
sense of anticipation about the event’s outcome. Yet the text—placed, for
the most part, in the upper right and lower left quadrants of the field of
vision—overlays the image with a counterdiagonal that stabilizes the
image, turning it into a self-enclosed hieroglyphic that is both figurative
and abstract.
Another characteristic of the Bass brand originating in Bauhaus

64

Designer and Filmmaker
thinking, then, was the establishment of balance and symmetry within
the image or from image to image, as in films. Each graphic element
brought its own dynamic force that had to be harnessed within the visual
field to guide the eye to the essential information. Although Bass never
talked about it, it seems clear from an analysis of his design work that he,
like the European Bauhaus designers before him, relied heavily on a grid
structure to work out the various design elements on a two-dimensional
plane. The trade advertisement for Hard, Fast, and Beautiful is a perfect
example of the underlying grid at work in Bass’s design. A central horizontal axis allows Bass to balance the text-heavy film title and tagline
across the bottom half of the frame, while the invisible central vertical
axis guides the black arch of images and stabilizes, through symmetry,
the white text of the title within the red field. The result is an image of
movement and stasis that draws the eye to its center and then guides it to
the images and text.
The final characteristic of the Bass brand was his ability to create a
cogent design element, image, or logo that could be utilized repeatedly
across different media and had the ability to cement the identity of a product within that iconography. This mode of operation was obviously a necessary step in designing corporate logos and identity campaigns, as Bass
conceived them. However, the Bass-designed iconic images for film advertising, whether the crooked arm for The Man with the Golden Arm or the
Vertigo spiral, were something completely new, functioning in exactly the
same way as corporate logos but also tapping into deeper levels of collective psychology. Bass’s employment of repetitive design elements to
enhance product identification went far beyond establishing logos.
Indeed, some critics have complained that “the frequent recourse to California rainbows, also lay him open to charges of repetition.”115
For example, Bass’s campaign for Pabco paints utilized its corporate
identity of rainbow colors (established in the 1920s) to design a series of
simple line drawings on a black background, whereby the rainbow-colored line was seemingly drawn by a single paintbrush.116 Rainbows or
rainbow-color motifs also appeared, logically, in a campaign for Fuller
paints; as design elements in Bass’s own Bass/Yager & Associates logo,
the entrance to the Bass design studio, and posters for the Chicago International Film Festival; in the identity campaigns for Japan Energy Corporation (1994) and United Airlines (1974); in the invitation to the premiere
of The Pride and the Passion (1957); in the logos for Frank Holms Labo-

65

SAUL BASS
ratories (1954), United Way (1972), Paul Harris (1973), Pomona College (1987), and Special Olympics (1989); in the electronic, moving
logos for Hanna-Barbera (1979), Kibun (1984), and the National Film
Registry (1989); and as a cover image for IDEA magazine (1990). Bass
even designed a monochromatic rainbow typography.117 Rainbows are
both pure color and deeply embedded in our collective imagination of
fairy tales and magic and the glory of nature after a sudden rainstorm on
a hot summer’s day. One can assume that because Bass used a rainbow for
his own corporate logo, he associated the rainbow with creativity, endless
possibilities, and the freedom to go anywhere. Likewise, such associations
would have been seen as positive elements in the messages his clients
wanted to communicate.
Simultaneously, the repetition of design elements such as rainbows
allowed Bass to employ archetypal iconographies and motifs to address
audience desire, while defining the Bass brand for clients. Indeed, Bass
returned to certain images and forms almost obsessively throughout his
career, indicating that they held some deeper meaning for him that went
beyond the requirements of a particular design problem or campaign. In
fact, the Bass iconography tapped into archetypal images of the elements
of fire, water, wind, and earth, as well as visual jokes about modernity.

Recurring Visual Motifs
One of the most striking aspects of Saul Bass’s work as a designer is the
consistency of his look, his style, and his brand across media, whether
graphic art in his print ads and posters, two- and three-dimensional identity campaigns, commercials, film titles, or films. Certainly, over his nearly
fifty-year career, Bass strove to be at the forefront of modern design and
experimented with new techniques and new technologies, such as video
and digital imaging. But at the same time, there were consistencies in his
work that made Saul Bass Bass. He was a relentless promoter and understood the first rule of mass communications: to create a brand, you need
to repeat the message. And once that brand is created, it has to be rigorously maintained by limiting the design palette to a certain number of
techniques and design elements. Whether consciously or unconsciously—
the designer himself consistently resisted any attempt to define or analyze
his design elements—Bass drew from a well of images and iconographies
that appeared repeatedly in his work. Such brand consistency served sev-

66

Designer and Filmmaker
eral purposes. First, like all branding, it associated a particular product
with certain qualities that would sell an item. Like Hollywood and its endless remakes and sequels, Bass reutilized and repurposed successful design
elements. One concept that became an integral part of the Bass brand was
the creation of logo-like images that, in their stripped-down simplicity,
defined and encapsulated an entire film. As Bass noted, the core of modern advertising is simplicity, requiring concentration on a single point to
drive the message home and have the product positively identified.118 Second, logos for corporate clients, similar to the logo-like images created for
films, identified the company or the product in a specific way that made it
recognizable and desirable to potential clients. Having said that, Bass
would also reuse images and motifs in a variety of contexts that furthered
the goal of the Bass brand more than the goal of any one product. This
gave clients a notion of what they could expect when they hired the design
firm for a specific project. The reuse of images would not have been
immediately apparent to clients because of the variety of contexts in which
they were utilized. For example, Bass employed an identical globe with
arms extended from inside the globe (and an almost identical color
scheme) in advertisements for the Detroit News (1961) and the titles for
It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963).119 Given that the first usage
was strictly local, whereas the later film titles reached a national audience,
and given that two different media were involved, Bass’s reuse can be seen
as part of the effort to create his own brand.
The globe image points to one of the most common design elements
in all of Bass’s work: circles. They were often a prominent, formal design
element, whether images of setting or rising suns, representations of the
earth, abstracted globes, or pupils as a metaphor for vision. According to
Jeff Okun, Bass was interested in simple shapes more than anything,
which is why he chose circles as the center of so many designs. Indeed,
he was more focused on graphic design and compositional elements than
on any semantic meaning.120 Gestalt psychologist Rudolf Arnheim identifies the circle as one of the simplest visual patterns. Its perfection attracts
attention because humans are genetically predisposed to a perceptual
preference for round shapes. Interestingly, Arnheim, like Bass, connects
the circular form to vision and the eye, noting that “the animal eye is one
of the most striking visual phenomena in nature.”121 For Gestalt psychology, then, the graphic element of the circle elicits a physiological response
that is deeply ingrained in biology and the survival of the species, since

67

SAUL BASS
the perception of a predator’s eye can mean life or death for the prey. At
the more mundane level of graphic design, if Bauhaus theory stipulates
that a line represents the motion of a pencil guided by the hand of an artist across a page, the circle represents continuous or infinite movement
around a central axis. The circle is a self-enclosed form, conveying a
strong sense of autarky, and is considered by Bauhaus artists to be one of
the basic formal elements of design, along with squares and lines.
Moholy-Nagy encapsulates all three design elements in his painting Yellow Circle (1921), which places a yellow sun in the bottom left quadrant
of the image, overlaid with x- and y-axes (lines), and a square; this composition shifts the balance to just below the painting’s center. In MoholyNagy’s nonrepresentational painting, the yellow circle is an abstraction, a
plane of yellow color, yet even here, cultural meaning reverberates
through the image.
There is something primeval about the circle, given that it was probably one of the first shapes perceived by primitive humans looking up at
the moon and the sun, which are typically associated with deities. Those
first humans would have been able to take a stick and draw a circle in the
sand to communicate the notion of a cosmic force or unity greater than
mortal man. For millennia, the Native American hoop or medicine wheel
has signified the universe and nature—the Wakan Tanka, in the language
of the Sioux. Images of the sun, in particular, carry implications of the
orb’s life-giving force, its ability to produce warmth, to grow food, and so
forth. The spiritual dimensions of the sun (the ancient Greeks and many
other cultures considered the sun a deity) imbue the circle with rich symbolic meaning as something universal, sacred, divine, and infinite. It follows that the divine energy of the circle also connects the form to fertility,
whether for growing food or for procreation of the species. In addition,
because circles enclose and separate an inside space from an outside space,
they imply safety and protection—whether in Celtic mythology, where
Stonehenge’s giant protective circle demarcates a privileged space, or
more mundanely in western movie mythology, where the wagons form a
circle to defend against an attack by Indians. All these cultural and emotionally charged associations reverberate in Bass’s utilization of images of
the sun.
Bass employed the image of a yellow sun in an orange-red sea for his
poster of the William Wyler western The Big Country and, more surrealistically, in his poster for the “Sixth Israel Film Festival in the USA” (1989).

68

Designer and Filmmaker
A setting sun turns up almost obsessively as an image in nature, whether
in That’s Entertainment II or in his films Why Man Creates and Quest. We
can trace this image through numerous works in multiple media.
Abstracted, the image of the sun first appears in Bass’s corporate identity
campaign for Lightcraft of California (1952), in a television commercial
for Sun detergent (1956), and on the cover of the sound-track album for
Hurry Sundown (1967). While all three renderings are different in style,
they have in common a playful execution. Likewise, the opening sequence
for NBC: The First 50 Years (1976) begins playfully with a young boy
drawing a simple, abstracted sun with chalk on a blackboard, which represents the universe; this dissolves to an actual image of the sun flaring out
from behind the earth, then cuts to aerial images of a fertile earth. The
sequence can be interpreted as a visual metaphor for the history of NBC
from the childlike innocence of early television to the mature and bountiful programs of the 1970s. But it can also be seen as an expression of
Bass’s own mystical relationship to nature, which seemed to grow stronger over time.
In his Bohemian beer commercials (1950s), the sun is a force that
must be blocked for proper brewing, while in the credit sequence for
Something Wild (1961), the sun seems to be an almost alien force, surviving in a concrete jungle of skyscrapers. In The Searching Eye (1964), the
camera zooms in on the eye of the boy protagonist as he makes a telescope with a sheet of paper, then cuts to a reverse shot in a perfectly
matched image of a glowing yellow-orange sun as it sets in the ocean. As
in the NBC special, Bass is allowing us to view nature and the beauty of
the world through the eyes of a child, hoping to capture some of the
innocence, exuberance, and emotional wonder of such a vision. That particular constellation of signifiers is also at the center of Bass’s poster for
Why Man Creates (1968), which again features a huge yellow sun, surrounded by a field of red, with a single human in silhouette in the foreground. But that figure, which has a very small head and hugely elongated
arms and legs, looks like it was drawn by a child or by a modernist artist
like Giacometti. Virtually the same image appears in the film proper,
introducing a sequence that concerns primitive and ancient humans’
attempt to depict nature in art. Bass essentially remakes the image in his
poster for The Solar Film (1980), which visualizes a rising yellow sun in a
blue sky; a toddler in diapers in the foreground walks toward the sun,
framed in exactly the same way the stick figure was framed in the earlier

69

SAUL BASS
poster for Why Man Creates. While the visual imagery is the same, the
semantics of the image have changed; here, the child walking toward the
sun represents the future world powered by solar energy.
In a Bridgestone commercial from the 1960s, a girl skips rope in front
of a red-yellow sun; it also turns up in a Security Pacific Bank commercial
from 1979. In some work, such as Bass’s credit sequence for That’s Entertainment II (1976) or his film Notes on the Popular Arts (1977), a setting
sun seems to denote nothing more than a happy ending, while elsewhere,
the setting and rising sun is imbued with the mystical force of nature, such
as in Phase IV (1974), Quest (1983), a Matsushita commercial (late
1970s), and the credit sequence for The Silk Road (1988). Finally, for
advertisements for the documentary The Naked Eye (1957), Bass puts an
eye inside a sun image, thus uniting two of his favorite icons.
This repeated use of photographic representations of the sun in multiple media indicates that the image held more than a passing interest for
Bass; it tapped into some deep-seated emotions that went well beyond the
imperatives of branding. This aspect of Bass’s design work is explored in
later chapters, where the focus is on reading individual films and other
works involving moving images. The next chapter returns to the origins
of the designer’s film work: credit sequences for Hollywood films. It is in
this arena that Bass may have had his greatest impact as a designer, since
he has been rightfully acknowledged as the father of modern title sequences
not only by historians but also by the present generation of title
producers.

70

2

Film Titles
Theory and Practice
Having previously branded himself as the most innovative designer of
modern Hollywood film titles, Saul Bass took a twenty-year hiatus.
Between Seconds (1966) and Broadcast News (1987), he designed only a
couple of titles for Otto Preminger, as well as That’s Entertainment II
(1976).1 He took his name off the credits for Looking for Mr. Goodbar
(1977) after a monumental fight with director Richard Brooks, but by
then, title work was no longer a factor in the Bass studio business. Apparently, title work on several films in the late 1960s fell through, including
a planned prologue and title for Hawaii (1966) and The Party (1968).2
According to Jeff Okun, Bass had stopped creating credit sequences
because his partner Herb Yager argued that titles were labor intensive and
never made any money. Given that the office was in financial trouble, Bass
was supposedly allowed to take credits work only if the more lucrative corporate identity work didn’t suffer.3 Since Yager didn’t join the firm until
1974, Bass’s ambition to become a director of shorts and feature films
probably explains the lack of involvement in title credits in the preceding
decade. However, even in the 1960s, Bass, who was not a talented businessman, was constantly overspending and getting into conflicts with his
business manager Morrie Marsh. Mike Lonzo, who worked with Bass in
the mid-1960s, got the feeling that Bass enjoyed creating titles more as a
hobby because they were so labor intensive and such money losers.4
As Bass stated in an interview, after setting off “a Renaissance in
titles,” he simply “got bored with the activity and had to get out of it,
mainly because I did want to go on to other things.”5 In another interview, he stated that Hollywood film directors began to exert total control

71

SAUL BASS
over their films (much like their European counterparts) and were thus no
longer willing to turn titles over to someone else.6 In his American Film
Institute seminar in 1979, he claimed he got out of the title business
because titles “were beginning to get irresponsible and irrelevant.”7 However, this argument seems unlikely, given that Bass’s clients were auteurs,
both before (Preminger) and after (Scorsese) the hiatus. Finally, in his film
Bass on Titles, Yager asks Bass straight out whether he has abandoned his
work on titles. Bass’s answer indicates that he has closed that chapter of
his career and moved on to filmmaking: “My work on titles was a marvelous opportunity to learn about filmmaking. I touched on every aspect of the
process, both creatively and technically. I worked with many wonderful people. But there are always new challenges.”
Two other factors may have played a part in Bass’s break from titles.
It is possible that some filmmakers began to shy away from Bass because
his titles were too successful, leading numerous critics to state that the
title sequences were better than the films that followed.8 According to
James Pollack, head of titling services for the National Screen Service
(NSS), which produced the Bass-designed titles for Billy Wilder’s The
Seven Year Itch, Wilder never again worked with NSS (or Bass, for that
matter) on a title sequence after a film critic wrote, “If the film had lived
up to the titles, it would have been a good picture.”9 Time magazine
noted that more than half the New York film critics observed that Bass’s
titles for A Walk on the Wild Side were better than the film: “Suggesting
the story’s themes of harlotry, perversion and vengeance, it set the mood
that the ensuing picture tried but failed to match.”10 Bass remembered
having a very uncomfortable lunch with director Edward Dmytryk after
the reviews appeared.11 When The Searching Eye was shown at the Chicago Film Festival in 1964, one critic quipped: “But Saul Bass, whose
credits alone have made some of the worst movies worth the price, was
almost enough to redeem the evening.”12 Bass was quickly becoming a
stereotype of himself. Variety went so far as to say that Bass might no longer find work in the title field: “There has been a somewhat too frequent
use of the line ‘The best thing about the film is the Saul Bass credits’—and
Bass is apt to wonder that anyone will ever hire him again.”13 In fact, he
did worry about that.14
It may also be true that Bass had priced himself out of the market.15
However, this is a matter of conjecture, given that all financial records
from before the 1970s were apparently lost, and Bass kept mum about his

72

Film Titles
fees.16 Fortunately, a letter survives (in the Gregory Peck Papers) in which
Bass summarizes for an anxious producer the production costs for his previous title work, excluding his $15,000 design fee and the advertising
campaign:
“Carmen Jones” (color & Cinemascope)
“Man with the Golden Arm” (black & white)
“Saint Joan” (black & white)
“Seven Year Itch” (color & Cinemascope)
“Attack” (black & white)
“Storm Center” (black & white)
“The Pride and the Passion” (color)

$4,500
3,500
6,000
8,000
1,700
3,300
7,000

As you will note there is a wide divergence and range reflecting
different problems of production. As I indicated in our conversation I could not estimate the production cost of a title for “The
Big Country” until a clear picture existed of what was to be done.
But, as you know, almost anything interesting that you would do
(especially in color) tends to run to considerable amounts. . . . To
restate the situation: In projecting costs for the title, the only
additional amount to calculate is my design fee. The rest of the
costs remain generally the same as they would be were I not
involved in the matter.17
American Cinematographer noted in 1960 that the cost of Bass’s elaborate title design for Around the World in 80 Days was so high in order “to
discourage all but the most ambitious producers.”18 That title is conspicuously absent from Bass’s list.
According to internal memos in the Stanley Kramer Collection, Bass
charged a $10,000 fee for The Pride and the Passion, which equaled his
standard fee for his work with Preminger.19 That jibes with the fees
reported by Stephen Rebello; he notes that Bass was paid $10,000 to
design the credits for the low-budget Psycho, which cost $21,000 to produce, or approximately 3 percent of the total $800,000 budget.20 According to a 1964 Variety article, the average price for movie titles was $7,500
to $8,000 for a quality film, with animated titles (such as Freleng’s Pink
Panther titles) running closer to $25,000. With his design fees, Bass titles
were on the expensive side, but not overly so. An exception was the whop-

73

SAUL BASS
ping $45,000 Universal paid for Bass’s Spartacus titles.21 Bass also refused
to put out bids, which was becoming the industry norm in the 1960s, as
many producers trawled for the lowest bidder. Presentations for bids
could cost a designer anywhere from $300 to $3,000, with no way to
recoup any of that investment if the job went elsewhere.
There was also a backlash against inventiveness in credit design, first
from the industry and then from at least one well-known critic. As early as
1957, Variety expressed a prevalent view in the industry: “There are those
who feel that credit originality can be overdone. . . . However, there’s
some suspicion that an offbeat credit runoff, while pleasing to the patrons,
does an injustice to the talent since the audience’s attention is diverted
from the names.”22 Bass’s independence could be taken two ways: positively, as an attempt to be a trailblazer, or negatively, as an effort to assert
too much control over the production process. As Fred Foster wrote in
American Cinematographer, Bass keeps “a close vigil on every title project
until it is fully cut, in order to maintain the original concept.”23 In a piece
about a hypothetical film Poncho (aka The Sundowners), critic Vincent
Canby described the vagaries of the ad campaign in which Bass’s “classy
layouts” and “simple striking designs in the modern manner” are upended
by “the company topper” who loves them at first and then desperately
needs images of the love scene.24
Beyond industry voices, there were film critics. In a piece on the
newly developing art-house audience for high-quality European cinema,
Pauline Kael, ever the faux populist, attacked Bass by name:
And so American movies now often come, packaged as it were,
with several minutes of ingenious, abstract, eye-catching titles.
This send-off—the Swiss-graphics look provided by Saul Bass and
other designers—has virtually nothing to do with style or mood
of the picture, but makes the movie look more modern. (How can
the picture be dismissed as trash when it looks like your own
expensive living room?) This type of design, using basic colors
and almost no soft lines, was, of course, devised so that advertising would be clear and effective with a minimum of cost. In movies, a photographic medium, complexity and variety of shadings
of beauty are no more expensive than simplification. But modern
graphic design, which has built an aesthetic on advertising economics, has triumphed.25

74

Film Titles
The backlash continued a few years later in the New York Times, no less,
when a critic noticed that movie titles had increased in length from one
minute in the 1930s to six minutes in the 1960s, concluding that the
credits “were getting out of hand.”26 But the writer conveniently forgot
to mention that industry standards had radically changed since the studio
era, and many more individuals were receiving screen credit.
Ken Coupland commented laconically on Bass’s evolving reputation
in movie land: “His fall from favor in the film industry was apparently due
to a combination of factors, part aesthetics, part economics—and part
hubris.”27 Be that as it may, today Saul Bass is recognized as “the father of
modern film title design.”28

That’s Entertainment II
According to Saul Bass, he took on the titles for That’s Entertainment II
(1976) as a personal favor to Gene Kelly, who asked him to do it.29 It was
a sequel to That’s Entertainment (1974) and a compilation of great screen
moments from Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer’s storied history. Bass solved the
problem of having to list almost every famous actor in MGM’s golden-age
roster by creating titles that parodied conventional credit sequences as they
had been produced since the 1930s. Bass described his task as follows:
The opening consisted of the recreation and montaging of all the
great old title devices that we used “way back when.” The wave
washes upon the shore obliterating the names lettered in the
sand. The scroll unrolls revealing the names and is consumed in
flames. The names are formed by flower petals floating on water
as the breeze scatters them. The names recede into the glorious
sunset . . . are branded on wood . . . are cast in gold letters on red
velvet . . . are rung up on an old cash register, etc., concluding
with a pull back from snow covered mountains revealing the title
of the film in monumental snow covered granite against the
heavens.30
As the credits unspool, the viewer is exposed to a series of clichés associated with films, genres, or even studios, in a mash-up that itself becomes
a meditation on the semantics of titles.
As Bass notes, clichés function as visual shorthand: “Clichés are ter-

75

SAUL BASS
ribly important, because they communicate in an extraordinary way, that’s
what turns them into clichés, because they get used again and again until
you tire of them.”31 Elsewhere, Bass states that he “used ideas, which had
not been appropriate for other films.”32 This was Bass at his most playful,
yet he also managed to insert at least one of his signature images to identify the sequence as a Bass product. In fact, Bass was most interested in
Hollywood’s mythic reality, so he inserted titles that might never have
been done but were “the kind of thing that should have been done.”33 As
one critic wrote of the titles: “He’d retain the very qualities which dated
them and gave them their own special charm and naïveté—flat lighting,
slight clumsiness, funny colour.”34
The film begins with a quasi-biographical montage of Fred Astaire
and Gene Kelly, the two cohost-narrators of the film.35 It opens with a
color image of an embossed, brown, leather-bound scrapbook whose first
page reproduces the MGM “Ars Gratia Artis” logo; the image bleeds to
black and white and then cuts to a series of gold-framed photographic
portraits of Astaire and Kelly from babyhood to adulthood. These are
interlaced with stock shots of trains, closing suitcases, disembodied chorus-girl legs, theater marquees, and clapping audiences, sutured with rapid
dissolves that typically indicate a rise to stardom in classical Hollywood
films—the kind of montage Slavko Vorkapich excelled in producing.36
Bass would reuse the device of tracking along family portraits in his contribution to the credits for A River Runs through It (1992), directed by
Robert Redford, for which Wayne Fitzgerald ultimately got credit.37
The last two photos include the signatures of Astaire and Kelly, and
the next image returns to color: the USC marching band forming (in fast
motion) the word “AND” on a football field, replicating a similar shot in
Moholy-Nagy’s The New Vision.38 The Vorkapich-style “rise-to-stardom”
montage not only pays homage to his fellow Angelino but also recalls
Bass’s mastery of the form in both commercials (Mennen Baby Magic)
and titles (The Victors). Apart from introducing the film’s narrators, the
montage sequence also references the transition from silent films to musicals, the most popular film genre at the beginning of the 1930s. The
marching band scene is clearly a joke, given its out-of-proportion ratio
between production effort and semantic content.
The sequence cuts to three names scrawled in the sand, which are
then washed away by the surf. Each group of names that follows is presented in a different style with an appropriate typography: a medieval

76

Film Titles
parchment is opened by disembodied hands, revealing Gothic script, and
then burns away; names appear as pebbles in a tropical pool before they
float away; a setting yellow sun in a red sky (Bass’s signature image)
appears behind scrawl credits in white block letters that disappear into a
vanishing point just above the orb; the red sky dissolves to red velvet, and
the camera tracks over gold-plated three-dimensional letters that sparkle
in the light; turning pages of a book reveal Book Antiqua typography;
handwritten names are part of a message in a bottle in the surf; names pop
up on an old-time manual cash register; credits are typed on a manual
typewriter by invisible hands; an open file drawer reveals names on the
files; names are branded into wood with western music; “Lassie” is marked
on dominoes that fall; names appear and dissolve on a Chinese gong
(familiar as J. Arthur Rank’s logo). The sequence ends with the camera
panning up a painted cartoon image of a mountain with the film’s title
seemingly chiseled in the rock.
First, it should be noted that while the opening title sequence lists all
the actors who appear in archive footage, it does not include any behindcamera credits, unlike Bass’s other title sequences. Those names appear in
the end credits, which are conventional and were apparently designed
without Bass’s input. Rather than having a unified look, as credits normally would, the title sequence’s heterogeneity mirrors the hodgepodge
of film clips that follow. Yet there seems to be little correlation between
the actors listed and the style of the individual title; for example, Judy Garland and Mickey Rooney starred together in numerous musicals but never
with Bing Crosby, yet all three are listed in a sand-and-surf shot.39 Another
onscreen couple, Spencer Tracy and Katharine Hepburn, are listed on a
giant gong but are seen only in behind-the-scenes footage in That’s Entertainment II.40 Furthermore, whereas the styles of the titles seem to refer
to every genre—from comedy to epic drama, from musicals to film noirish
crime dramas and westerns—That’s Entertainment II’s clips focus almost
exclusively on musicals and comedies. More logically, listing Robert Taylor on medieval parchment recalls his participation in such epics as Ivanhoe (1952) and The Knights of the Round Table (1953), while the
old-fashioned cash register names comedians Abbott and Costello, Jack
Benny, Robert Benchley, Laurel and Hardy, and the Marx Brothers, alluding to a jack-in-the-box. In at least two cases, the Bass re-creation correlates to particular actors’ credits: Nelson Eddy and Jeanette MacDonald
appeared in the musical Maytime, which had similar credits that floated

77

SAUL BASS
away, while the western-style title lists Betty Hutton and Howard Keel,
who starred together in Annie Get Your Gun (1952), the only example in
which the generic reference correlates to an actual clip in the film.
It is also worth noting what Bass omitted from his over-the-top survey of title styles. Given his own pioneering work in Hollywood, the
absence of any form of animation is particularly striking, as is the lack of
any experimental modes, whether in typography or graphic design.41 Animation is only hinted at in camera movement in the final title image. Postproduction special effects are limited to a roll title and an occasional
dissolve. Indeed, the titles are much more aesthetically conservative than
Bass’s other work and even more conservative than much of Hollywood’s
commercial production in the 1960s. Contemporary critics certainly
picked up on the parody in Bass’s opening sequence. Charles Michener of
Newsweek commented: “The title sequence, designed by old master Saul
Bass, lists the stars in a send up of just about every title sequence ever contrived to fit a genre.”42 An English film critic went even further: “Saul Bass
has designed the blissfully parodic main titles, as if to imply that what we
are about to watch is all part of a grandiose vulgarity no longer to be taken
very seriously by people as sophisticated as we are assumed to have
become.”43
Limiting his palette to clichéd forms increased the likelihood of a selfreflexive reading by audiences, but the question remains: Was Bass consciously excluding innovative title design not only to emphasize the cliché
but also to tap into the conservative nostalgia that had apparently appealed
to the blockbuster audiences of the original That’s Entertainment? Or was
it a manifestation of the nonthreatening style required by the moribund
studio brass? In any case, Bass was consciously commenting on a particular style of titles in the late classical era, before the appearance of the narrative, atmospheric titles he would promulgate. At the same time, the
self-conscious regurgitation of visual clichés in title design allowed Bass to
theorize that film titles are an important device in the construction of film
meaning, even in their most simplistic form.
Indeed, Saul Bass emphasized again and again in interviews that film
titles should be integral to the film’s overall aesthetic construction: “My
initial thoughts about what a title can do was to set the mood and the
prime underlying core of the film’s story, to express the story in some
metaphorical way. I saw the title as a way of conditioning the audience, so
that when the film actually began, viewers would already have an emo-

78

Film Titles
tional resonance with it.”44 In other words, rather than seeing a film’s
credit sequence as extraneous to the film proper or, at best, as a transitory
stage before the actual film narrative commences, Bass insisted on titles’
primacy as a means of engaging the viewer. This was a revolutionary concept in the film industry. In the late 1940s a title practitioner still had to
imagine a future where “the ideal title will indicate the mood of that picture in the most simple and direct means.”45
According to a New York Times piece in 1957, Bass had tried to convince several movie producers in the early 1950s that credit sequences
could be more than just a list of names: “No one seemed to understand
what I had in mind, because it had never been done before. I hardly knew
myself, except that I had this constant, vague, irritating feeling there must
be some way to make the titles an exciting accessory to the picture.”46
Ironically, by the early 1960s, the term “Bass-ish” was understood in
the industry to mean “any esoteric title comprising a sequence of frenetically gyrating forms.”47 But Bass, possibly unconsciously, also made a theoretical point when he said: “My idea is the first frame of the film is the
first frame of the film and the film begins then.”48 Indeed, David Bordwell
has argued similarly that no matter how primitive the titles, the reading of
the film begins with the first frame.49 As a critic in American Cinematographer put it more mundanely in 1960: “A number of directors and artists
have taken a new approach to titling their productions—1) let titles serve
as a positive introduction to the story by setting an appropriate mood, or
tempo; 2) make them interesting; and 3) make them easily readable.”50
This idea probably came from Bass (especially the legibility issue, which
would be a concern only to designers), since much of the rest of the article
discusses Bass’s pioneering title sequences. It seems clear that Bass
expressed the notion of titles “setting a mood” very early in his career,
causing the industry itself to adopt that terminology.51
Although the designer might seemingly envision the audience as malleable and passive, Bass’s title sequences were in fact constructed to engage
the viewer in active readership of the film. In other words, the sea change
in title design brought about by Bass and some of his cohorts involved a
shift in the semantic and syntactical weight of the credit sequence in relation to the narrative proper. Geoff McFetridge, a third-generation title
designer very much indebted to Bass, has succinctly summarized the Bass
legacy: “Titles are looked at on a few different levels. . . . Like how the
piece is going to fit into the film, how it works to change the film, and

79

SAUL BASS
how it works independently of the film as an abstract impression of the
film.”52 Thus, in keeping with the gradual breakdown of classical narrative
tropes and styles, Bass’s work demanded an active reader rather than an
audience that could lose itself in narrative. To explicate Bass’s aesthetic, as
well as his place in the history of Hollywood title design, it will be useful
to unpack theoretically how title design informs the film viewing
experience.

Theoretical Models
Anyone who grew up in the 1950s or earlier, before multiplexes dominated cinema culture, remembers that the projectionist invariably began a
film with the theater curtain down, projecting the studio’s logo, the film’s
title, and sometimes other credits on the curtain as it rose. Raising the
curtain after the projector had been engaged emphasized the theatrical
experience and gave the opening an anticipatory and ritualistic staging for
audiences. In larger theaters, the house organist would finish his or her
preshow performance with a flurry as the lights dimmed, the projector
was thrown into gear, and the curtain began its slow rise. This was a clear
indication of the status of film titles in the classical era: they represented a
transitional moment between the cartoon, the newsreels, the trek to the
concession stand, and the actual movie. Undivided attention was not
required because, in the eyes of the audience (and the projectionist, as a
representative of the industry), the film’s narrative had not yet begun.
When The Man with the Golden Arm was sent to theaters, it included a
note to the projectionist “to pull curtain before titles” so the audience
could actually see the titles.53 That started a revolution.
Producers failed to discourage the earlier practice because the titles
addressed the audience directly, communicating information about the
making of the film, whereas in classical Hollywood, modes of address of
necessity took an indirect approach through mechanisms of viewer identification. Titles therefore seemed more closely aligned with newsreels
and other more self-conscious prefilm offerings than with the film’s
diegetic construction. In fact, as film theorist André Gardies has noted,
film titles always serve a double function that is, to a certain degree, at
cross-purposes, especially in classical cinema.54 In one sense, titles inform
the viewer about the behind-the-scenes history of a film’s production:
who is appearing in the film, from the stars down to the supporting roles;

80

Film Titles
who directed the actors; who manipulated the camera; who wrote the
story; who designed the costumes; and so forth. The credits also communicate copyright and other legal information, gauge the relative
importance of the individual participants through their graphic and syntactic placement, and even hint at a film’s budget, depending on how
elaborate the title sequence is. All this information was considered extraneous to the subsequent narrative and indeed delayed the moment when
the viewer could be coaxed into the narrative via identification with a
character. However, this nondiegetic content can also contribute to the
production of narrative meaning. For instance, if the film stars an actor
with a well-defined screen persona (e.g., it’s a John Wayne film) or if it
was directed by an auteur with a consistent set of obsessions and a particular style, the audience will be reminded of the artist’s previous work.
In this sense, film credits also function as a transition between the film
being projected and all other films previously made by the production
team. Furthermore, in the classical period, the studio’s opening logo, as
well as the style of the credits that followed, branded the studio and its
total output rather than an individual film.
At the same time, film credits lead the viewer into the diegesis through
visual and auditory cues that foreshadow the narrative. Rather than visualizing a specific narrative iteration, they speak to the viewer by harnessing
generic expectations—for example, by putting a set of laughing masks in
the corner of the title frame to indicate a comedy. Indeed, typeface and
decorative embellishments have been correlated with genre since the first
decade of cinema’s existence. Typographic features became highly conventionalized; after The Mask of Fu Manchu (1932), the use of pseudoChinese Latin characters became de rigueur for all subsequent
Asian-themed Hollywood films.55 Credits rolling over a live-action or still
image might also connote genre, foreshadowing an important location
or creating a particular atmospheric mood, such as the image of a night
train screaming through a deserted, highly lit suburban train station seen
over the opening credits of Brief Encounter (1946). Thierry Kuntzel
begins his close textual and Freudian analysis of Ernest B. Schoedsack
and Irving Pichel’s The Most Dangerous Game (1931) with the film credits, where images of a door and a door knocker—both prominent in the
film to come—provide a background to the title graphics.56 Especially in
the silent period, actors’ credits were often printed over moving images
of the principal players in costume, bowing to the audience—another

81

SAUL BASS
self-conscious device that simultaneously delayed and presaged the narrative to come.
In other words, title sequences have always served both diegetic and
nondiegetic functions. What has changed is the ratio between the two. In
the classical period, the credits’ emphasis was on branding the studio and
its players within an ongoing production schedule, not on individual film
narratives, which were often interchangeable. It was only with the rise of
independent producer-directors after World War II that the need to differentiate each individual film began to take precedence, moving the focus
away from studio recognition and toward the crafting of an engaging narrative hook, beginning with the titles. This shift in the ratio between
diegetic and nondiegetic content made sense, given that independent
producers usually had all their financial eggs in one basket—namely, the
film at hand—and only its success would guarantee further productions.
Each film therefore had to be marked by and marketed through its own
unique identity.
As the above theses indicate, film titles are also distinguished from the
main narrative by the fact that they communicate knowledge through
multiple media rather than simply through graphics and sound. Credit
sequences might employ numerous techniques such as animation, liveaction shots, still images, distorted lenses, postproduction special effects,
rapid montages, or slow tracking shots. In this sense, film titles can be
much more experimental than the body of a film, and they even influenced classical film style.57 Film titles are always of necessity logocentric,
whereas the film proper may communicate over broad stretches with little
dialogue or no words at all. Typography, composition and layout, movement, color, design, and underlying images (or the lack thereof) all contribute to the overall design of film titles. Bass, in particular, explored the
potentialities of moving graphics to keep the audience’s attention, incorporating little “narrative” surprises or graphic anomalies in his typography. However, a fundamental tension between word and image remained.
As Tom Conley notes: “Writing is never the film itself, but both the image
and script are together, within each other, in various degrees of tension
that cannot be resolved.”58 And although typography was largely standardized in the interest of a branded house style during much of the classical period, it would become an important element in the differentiation
of individual films once the studio system began to break down in the late
1940s.

82

Film Titles
Given the heterogeneous nature of film credits and their need to
communicate through multiple media, reading film titles is and was a
much more conscious activity than film viewing. Even in the classical studio period, when any artifice was seen as an impediment to viewer identification with the narrative, film titles delayed the moment of view
identification (1) because the narrative proper usually began with the first
scene and (2) because reading credits demanded that the viewer become
conscious of his or her own position as subject-viewer outside the film.
This positioning of the subject outside the narrative would continue even
after title designers began to incorporate more elements of the narrative
proper into the opening credits and even when the film’s narrative began
before the credit sequence and then continued as the credits rolled. Such
an intermingling of narrative and film titles became possible only after the
tenets of classical Hollywood style had given way to more self-conscious
narratives, often at the edge of parody. This latter phenomenon would
reach its apotheosis with Maurice Binder’s titles for the James Bond films
and the opening credit sequence for Sergio Leone’s Once upon a Time in
the West (1968), which runs for more than six minutes and has only four
lines of dialogue. Within a few years, these aesthetic changes would accelerate with the introduction of digital technology, leading to an anythinggoes attitude.
Returning to film titles’ dual function as communicators of both
diegetic and nondiegetic information, pushing and pulling the viewer in
and out of the narrative, we might theorize that film titles ultimately naturalize any diegetic space by contrasting their artifice to the film’s story.59
Thus, although film titles may suppress their own artifice by employing
narrative devices—the turning of pages or the burning of a parchment—
the remaining structural artificiality always highlights the continuous flow
of images and synchronous dialogue that follows (the film) as a more natural form of perception—that is, as more real than the credits. Whereas
the narrative proper is subject to continuity editing (more or less, depending on the film’s style), credit sequences are often segmented into individual, self-contained frames in which the semantic content or even style
often changes drastically from frame to frame, as seen in many of Bass’s
film titles.
Modern film titles themselves are now subject to a variety of placements within a film’s total length, whether at the beginning, middle, or
end. Indeed, film credits were almost always divided between the begin-

83

SAUL BASS
ning and end of a film, even in the classical period, when the end credits
usually listed the players and their roles. In the late classical period and
certainly in the modern era, film titles appear at both the beginning and
end of a film. The demise of the studio system necessitated that every participant in a film’s production be listed in the credits as evidence of
employment. Previously, many studio workers who were under contract
remained anonymous, and the credits named only the principals or the
department heads. The post–studio system industry, consisting largely of
freelance labor, demanded credit for all. As the earlier discussion of That’s
Entertainment II illustrates, it was up to the individual producer whether
the title designer was responsible for the end credits. In the case of The
Seven Year Itch (1955) and Advise and Consent (1962), Bass designed
humorous end titles; for That’s Entertainment II and other films, he did
not.
Finally, a film’s titles must be understood in relation to all the print
and broadcast publicity that precedes their unspooling, as well as the trailers that announce a film’s arrival.60 Such collateral material creates audience expectations that can be either fulfilled or denied in a film’s opening
moments, depending on its construction and design. In the classical
period, the studio’s marketing department was responsible for posters,
lobby cards, press books, and magazine, trade, and newspaper advertisements, as well as film credits. At Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer, this meant that
film title designers worked under Howard Dietz, the head of publicity,
and Hal Burrows, the studio’s art director in New York, before the final
designs were sent to Culver City for production and insertion into the
film.61 It is no accident that Bass began in publicity, moved to titles, and,
as a designer, often handled both aspects of a film. His ambition to identify a film for its potential audience through the simplest, most identifiable
forms took branding to a new level, especially in title design.

A Short History of Titles
The first film titles appeared in the silent era more than 100 years ago.
Surprisingly, a comprehensive history of title design has yet to be written,
although the subject has been covered in several works and a few isolated
essays on the Internet.62 As a result, Bass’s claim that title design remained
unchanged for decades until he entered the field has seldom been challenged. Authorized Bass biographer Pat Kirkham notes: “In U.S. films of

84

Film Titles
the early-to-mid 1950s, the majority of what then were often called title
backgrounds consisted of a fairly short list of credits, often in unimaginative lettering, rolling over a static image that suggested the genre of the
film.”63 Similarly categorical is Peter Hall’s statement: “The film title came
of age in 1955.”64 Ken Coupland argues: “It’s no exaggeration to say that
Bass . . . invented the modern movie title as we know it.”65 Gemma Solana
and Antonio Boneu call Bass “the putative father of all of today’s credit
designers.”66 In point of fact, the history of title design is much more
complex than such a one-dimensional model indicates. Deborah Allison,
in a more nuanced reading of the history of film titles, argues that gradual
changes in style occurred long before Bass and other 1950s designers initiated a sea change in title design. For example, she points to the elaborate
titles in George Cukor’s The Women (1939), which introduced the exclusively female cast with little vignettes, including images of animals that
physically or emotionally resembled the characters they played: Joan
Crawford was represented by a leopard; Joan Fontaine, a lamb; and Marjorie Main, a horse. Furthermore, Allison notes that such a visual introduction of the actors was not uncommon in the 1930s.67 In fact,
introducing actors by having them appear from behind a theatrical curtain
or in the midst of some emblematic activity was a common convention in
the silent era. For example, Cecil B. DeMille’s title sequence for The Cheat
(1915) featured actors Sessue Hayakawa, Fannie Ward, and Jack Dean
looking at the camera while performing a bit of business key to their characters. Establishing such precedents for innovative title design does not
lessen the achievement of Saul Bass; it merely acknowledges that title
design was considered an important activity long before Bass’s arrival on
the scene.
Indeed, although the earliest films by the Edison and Biograph companies from 1892 to 1900 featured neither head titles nor explanatory or
dialogue titles, title cards listing the film’s title and the production company became a standard practice after 1900, when films were no longer
than a single shot or two. Since films in this period were sold by producers
directly to exhibitors by the foot or the meter, the production company,
title, and copyright date were considered sufficient to identify the work.
During the silent era, titles usually featured white or light-colored typography on a black background, typically framed by company-specific
designs and the company logo. Including company logos and copyright
information became an absolute necessity because the illegal duping of

85

SAUL BASS
films for resale was endemic in the early years of the industry.68 However,
because head titles could be separated from the film, film companies were
often forced to incorporate logos into their sets, so they couldn’t be easily
removed.
Early film companies often adopted specific fonts for titles and intertitle cards, such as Pastel (BB&S, 1892), National Old Style (ATF, 1916),
and Photoplay (Samuel Welo’s Studio, 1927).69 The head title for Edwin
S. Porter’s The Great Train Robbery (1903) employed elaborate lettering
for the title but also included both the company logo and the copyright
notice in two different corners of the frame. By the early 1910s, film
companies were adding the name of the director-producer to the head
title, as well as that of the screenwriter. They also started to standardize
the look of the titles to brand the film production company, as the Biograph Company did for all films made by D. W. Griffith between 1908
and 1914.
By the 1920s, the basic information included on the head title had
expanded to include the names of writers, producers, and sometimes cameramen; the names of the stars had been added to head titles as early as
1913. Film companies created increasingly complex head titles, overcrowding the graphic look with the names of producers, writers, directors,
and actors, as well as company logos and source material; in addition,
drawn or photographic images were often included in the head title’s
background. Once narratives became more complex, films featured both
credit titles at the beginning and intertitles that reproduced dialogue or
other narrative information and often featured elaborate illustrations,
both as decoration and as commentary on the film.
The titles themselves were often hand-drawn on glass, then rephotographed against an artfully constructed background. With the invention
of optical printers in the early 1920s, and their improvement by Linwood
G. Dunn in the early 1930s, filmmakers could rephotograph other pieces
of film or multiple film images, allowing even more complex montages.
An optical printer would have been necessary to insert live-action background images behind titles, which, according to Bordwell, was introduced in 1923 with Universal’s The Merry-Go-Round (Rupert Julian and
Erich von Stroheim); animated titles were featured in The Speed Spook
(Charles Hines) the following year.70 Jack Jarmuth’s titles for The Jazz
Singer (1927) relied on optical printing and were produced by Pacific
Title and Art Studio, which had a virtual lock on title work in Holly-

86

Film Titles
wood.71 Subsequent title cards would include additional technical credits,
as well as a complete list of credited actors and their roles.
As Allison notes, the practice of bunching up numerous credits on a
single title card continued in the 1930s, after the introduction of sound.
Some credits also featured live-action or still background images, and others utilized animation and other moving graphic forms. Many also
employed a studio house style; for example, the MGM lion in stone relief
appeared in the background of many of the studio’s film credits.72 Deviations from the studio style were achieved most often through typography
and layout, which were tailored stylistically to match the film’s generic
and narrative characteristics. Indeed, studio lettering artists were extremely
inventive in employing novel typefaces and hand-lettering styles in conjunction with painted or photographed backgrounds to give each title
sequence its own identity. Looking over the numerous head titles collected by Steven Hill,73 it is clear that both fonts and layout remained very
traditional throughout the classical period, with few artists looking to
modernism or modernist graphic design for inspiration. As late as 1947, a
practitioner in the field of title design complained that the mandate to fill
the entire screen with text, no matter what the background, “puts the
designer somewhat in the position of the singer who must continuously
sing at full voice.”74 Not surprisingly, given its vulgarization of modernist
architecture, The Fountainhead (1949, King Vidor) has titles that mimic
modernist design. Typical of all title sequences from the 1930s and 1940s
is their relative brevity, with most running under one minute.75
Allison cites several examples of innovative and even self-reflexive film
credits. What Price Hollywood? (1932, Raoul Walsh), The Cat and the Fiddle (1933, William K. Howard), and You’ll Never Get Rich (1941, Sidney
Lanfield) place their credits on roadside billboards, seen from the point of
view of a moving vehicle. Similarly, Otto Preminger’s Where the Sidewalk
Ends (1950) has a camera track a man walking along a sidewalk, where the
head titles are written in white paint on the pavement; subsequent credits
appear over a nighttime street scene as plainclothes detectives drive down
the road. The head title for Sunset Boulevard (1950, Billy Wilder) appears
stenciled on a street curb. The Great Ziegfeld (1936, Robert Z. Leonard)
created titles out of Broadway marquee lights, a style Saul Bass would imitate in several films, including Ocean’s Eleven (1960, Lewis Milestone).76
Title designer Everett Aison discusses Of Mice and Men’s (1939) titles,
which appear several minutes into the film and are scrawled in chalk on

87

SAUL BASS
the side of a freight train the protagonists have just hopped.77 The graphic
layout and typography of Criss Cross (1949, Robert Siodmak) are conventional, but they literally melt off the screen, like the protagonist’s dream.
The head title of Samuel Fuller’s Scandal Sheet (1952, Phil Karlson)
appears under the masthead as a newspaper headline, and credits are
inserted into various columns. Finally, the act of making a credit sequence
is visualized in Carefree (1938, Mark Sandrich), where disembodied hands
draw the titles in finger-paint style on a glass surface painted black. In I
Love Melvin (1953, Don Weis), Debbie Reynolds writes the film’s title in
lipstick on a mirror, presaging Bass films that depict the act of writing or
lettering, such as Why Man Creates (1968).
Despite these and other early examples of innovative film titles, most
film historians agree that Saul Bass precipitated a major paradigm shift in
the way the industry viewed credit sequences. As one critic put it: “It is
mainly due to Bass that people have come to believe we are in the midst
of a Renaissance in title design.”78 Beginning in the mid-1950s, film titles
would become a new, specialized field for designers, allowing them greater
freedom to experiment and create specific identities for every film. As Bass
noted in 1960 in a short piece in Graphis: “I have approached the titles
with the objective of making them sufficiently provocative and entertaining to induce the theater inhabitants to sit down and watch, because
something is really happening on the screen. It then may become possible
to project a symbolic foretaste of what is to come, and to create a receptive
atmosphere that will enable the film to begin on a higher level of audience
rapport.”79
As noted, economic factors, especially the breakdown of the studio
system, led to conditions that could accommodate an independent artist
like Saul Bass. Whereas in the classic studio era it was Jack Warner at Warner Brothers or Darryl Zanuck at 20th Century–Fox or Howard Dietz at
MGM who decided on the look and lettering of film titles,80 independent
producers gravitated to independent designers who could brand their clients. Furthermore, the Hollywood strike of 1946 had precipitated the
founding of the Scenic and Title Artists Local 816, a union for graphic
artists and designers, which acknowledged that these individuals made
significant contributions to the look and feel of a film.81 Finally, the font
size for individual credits was contractually enforced by studio agreements
via so-called billing sheets, thus limiting the title artist’s choices. Indepen-

88

Film Titles
dent producers like Otto Preminger had the leeway to give their designers
more space, if they chose to do so.
By the 1960s, most of the studios had given up their titling operations, and a new subindustry emerged that focused on title design and
production; this situation continues today, with a new computer-trained
generation of film title designers. Bass first worked with National Screen
Service, which produced not only film titles but also a large percentage of
the “paper”—that is, the posters, stills, lobby cards, and other collateral
advertising for a film. But NSS was nowhere near the largest firm in the
business. That distinction was held by Pacific Title and Art Studio, which
was responsible for nearly 50 percent of all titles and worked almost exclusively for Warner Brothers, MGM, Fox, and Universal. Other companies
competing for the remaining titling business included Consolidated,
Howard Anderson, Ray Mercer, and DePatie-Freleng.
Over the next forty years, title design would continue to evolve from
the simple reproduction of film credits to elaborate prefilms that were
intended to be perceived as separate from the film proper. Technological
innovations also occurred, with glass-plate lettering and matte titling
(optical printing) eventually giving way to video and then digital effects,
all of which opened up multifarious possibilities for creative design.
The next generation of prominent designers would include Wayne
Fitzgerald, Pablo Ferro, Maurice Binder, Robert Brownjohn, and many
others. Just how quickly the industry changed is evidenced by the title
sequence for Silk Stockings (1957, Rouben Mamoulian), a musical remake
of Greta Garbo’s Ninotchka (1939, Ernst Lubitsch). The title could be
mistaken for a Bass design, particularly the way the screen is divided into
an ever-changing array of colored rectangles. But Silk Stockings was
designed by Wayne Fitzgerald, who began working at Pacific Title in 1951
and stayed through 1967, before going freelance. Indeed, Fitzgerald credits Bass with “changing everything” when it comes to titles.82 The Silk
Stockings title sequence takes its cue from the “Satin and Silk” musical
number in the film. Fabric bolts in various pastel colors roll either horizontally or vertically over the previously listed credits, never completely covering the preceding bolts as a new set of credits appears. Thus, at one point,
powder blue satin rolls up from the bottom, covering the right half of the
frame, while white, pink, and blue fabrics remain visible in horizontal and
vertical strips. The strict geometric construction of the screen space, the
use of a limited pastel color palette, the use of all capital letters for names

89

SAUL BASS
and credits, and the dynamic layout of justified text are all characteristic of
Bass’s style. Pacific Title’s layout, based on studio billing sheets, remained
rigidly centered and in the vertical safety zone of one-third above and onethird below the horizontal axis. Bass, probably because he was working in
wide-screen formats, chose to use left and right justification at the extreme
edges of the screen frame to demarcate his typographic space. Fitzgerald
began to play with the same idea in Silk Stockings.
Once the first generation of title designers, including Bass, had
opened up the process aesthetically, new technologies began to evolve. In
the 1970s video techniques and computer programming made inroads
among designers of title sequences, such as Dan Perri’s titles for Star Wars
(1977) or Richard and Robert Greenberg’s titles for Superman (1978).
With the introduction of desktop computer graphics programs like Adobe
After Effects, designers could design, animate, and composite credit
sequences on their own workstations, giving them a whole new level of
control.83 Kyle Cooper’s titles for Se7en (1995) have repeatedly been cited
as representative of the new possibilities of digital title design. Other
designers working in the field in the 1990s included Michael Riley, Karin
Fong, Robert Dawson, Garson Yu, Randy Balsmeyer and Mimi Everett,
Bob Freeman, Carla Swanson, and Melissa Elliot.84 A wholly digitally
trained generation of title designers has emerged since the turn of the
twenty-first century, including Nic Bends (Momoco), Jeremy Cox (Imaginary Forces), Pamela B. Green (PIC Agency), Erin Sarofsky, Smith &
Lee Design, and Steve Viola.

Design and Typographic Theory
Film credit sequences utilize both words and images, so there is a relationship between typography and visual design. What is the nature of that
relationship, and why do designers choose one particular typographic
style or font over another? Visual design creates meaning through the aesthetics of composition, layout, and images in connection with the semantic meanings of the text. Whereas design is more concerned with aesthetics,
typography is usually more concerned with legibility. In addition to font,
type size, and kern, typography is about the placement and graphic design
of the text: the spacing of words, sentences, and columns within the
frame.85
Design and typographic theory should answer questions about why

90

Film Titles
some designs work and others don’t, but few answers have been forthcoming. Indeed, although a set of prescriptive rules seemingly exists as a
result of decades of practice and the need to formalize conventions, little
has been published in the realm of design theory. Designers are loath to
theorize about their work, seeing each design problem as unique—form
following function, to use a cliché. When asked whether he had a philosophy of design, Bass responded: “Theories are very dangerous, and
philosophy is theory.”86 Bass’s colleague Paul Rand put it differently:
“There is no formula for good design; each problem is unique, as is each
solution.”87 Also typical is the statement of typography designer Peter
Bil’ak: “Type design, however, seems to resist attempts to establish an
encompassing theory by its very nature. Type design is not an intellectual
activity, but relies on a gesture of the person and his ability to express it
formally. Even if a theory existed, it would not be very useful, since type
design is governed by practice. There might be detailed ‘how to’ instructions, but those do not qualify as general or abstract principles for creating type.”88
The argument that design is intuitive and therefore not subject to the
kind of abstraction demanded by theory seems logical at first, until one
applies the same notion to art, which is also largely intuitive but for which
there is a large body of theory. Developing directly from the modernist art
movements of the early twentieth century, art theory focuses on perception, utilizing Gestalt psychology to undergird prescriptive rules for production that are supposedly justified by human biology. Rudolf Arnheim
and Gyorgy Kepes, among others, explicate design as an abstract formal
activity originating in visual perception and divorced from the linguistic
interpretation of texts.89 Indeed, Kepes’s The Language of Vision is, shockingly, completely devoid of any discussion of typography and texts in
visual design, as if cultural meaning were of no importance, as if historicalsocial context contributed nothing to perception. Yet even theorists of
typography tend to slip into naturalistic metaphors when trying to explicate good design: “In a badly designed book, the letters mill and stand
like starving horses in a field. . . . In a well-made book, where designer,
compositor and printer have all done their jobs, no matter how many
thousands of lines and pages, they must dance in the margins and aisles.”90
Such statements notwithstanding, this same theorist goes on to establish
some principles of typographic design. The first is that the inner logic of
the text must be reflected in the inner logic of the typography. In other

91

SAUL BASS
words, what does the text say, and how can that meaning be best expressed
in type? This principle can also be applied to typography in film credits,
where the goal is to create an inner logic between the content and meaning of the film and the typography of the credits. Second, typography
should make visible the relationship between the text and the other elements (e.g., photography, diagrams, notes). In title design, therefore,
relationships exist between typography and background images, animation, optical effects, and the like, all of which make up the total visual
design of the frame.91
One unwritten rule of the Hollywood film title business was that the
material used in film tiles had to be different from anything actually seen
in the film.92 It might therefore be productive to look at Saul Bass’s typography and compositional design strategies over a broad range of film credit
sequences before analyzing individual titles. If we can identify consistencies in the Bass style, design motifs, and brand, then we can begin to read
the designer’s work in its specific historical context—its moment in history—as well as understand how it speaks to the contemporary generation, spawning countless homages and imitations.

Bass on Titles
Saul Bass’s most comprehensive comments on his movie title work were
captured in a thirty-two-minute film he created for Pyramid Films, a distributor of educational short films for the 16mm nontheatrical market.
Bass had approached Pyramid about financing such a film, arguing that,
given the number of invitations he received to lecture on titles, there was
an educational market for a film on that subject. Discussions about a title
reel started in the Bass office as early as October 1968, but research began
in earnest in March 1973, when Morrie Marsh, Bass’s office manager,
approached Bob Bouchet at Pyramid. At first, both film and television
credits were going to be included. As Marsh noted in an internal memo
to Bass, such a film would “accommodate an interest . . . by every school
that has a film, theatrical or design department,” and it would “therefore
[be made] not so much for the purposes of entertainment as it is an
important piece of research material.”93
Two major issues slowed the preproduction work significantly. First,
there was the matter of obtaining clearances from the rights holders for
the long clips that would be necessary if the titles were to be shown in

92

Film Titles
their entirety (it had been decided that only “unabridged” titles would
serve an educational purpose). As late as May 1977, just months before
the film’s release, six of the ten titles had not yet been cleared. Interestingly, several titles were initially rejected because of “insufficient visual
interest,” including The Seven Year Itch, North by Northwest, and Spartacus.94 Surprisingly, the rights were eventually obtained at no cost to the
producers, and the approximately $30,000 it cost to make the film was
split between production expenses and Bass’s design fee. An even bigger
issue was the fact that many of the studios had discarded the original production materials for the titles chosen. According to Jeff Okun, he joined
the Bass office in 1976 to remake elements for It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad,
Mad World, Spartacus, Walk on the Wild Side, and Seconds, utilizing surviving outtakes and cribbing the music from sound-track albums.95 The
film was released on 15 September 1977 and was shown at various film
festivals over the next several years, including in Rotterdam (1981) and
Venice (1982); in the latter city, “producers and directors flocked” to
attend a packed midnight show.96
Bass on Titles follows the official Bass narrative. The designer makes
brief statements about ten credit sequences, ordered not chronologically but according to their supposed technical complexity. The off-camera interviewer, Herb Yager, begins by referencing Man with the Golden
Arm as the first animated logo in a credit sequence. In Harm’s Way and
Seconds are then presented as “the next logical step” in terms of moving
to live-action images. West Side Story and It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad
World are discussed as very long titles, while The Big Country, The Victors, and Grand Prix represent titles that function as temporal prologues, “further integrating the title into the film.” In fact, the sequence
shown for The Victors is not the end credits (which is interesting in its
own right) but a prologue occurring before the head title. Finally, the
titles for Nine Hours to Rama and A Walk on the Wild Side illustrate the
“most challenging aspect of any creative endeavor, and that is dealing
with ordinary things,” or making the ordinary stand out anew. The film
ends with Bass’s closing statement about being a filmmaker. As this brief
synopsis shows, the narrative structure of Bass on Titles is more anecdotal than theoretical. A review in the Educational Film Library Association’s journal was mixed: “A worthy tribute to Saul Bass, and a nice
chance to see his work collected for examination. A unique presentation
of an aspect of filmmaking which is rarely explored. Live sequences with

93

SAUL BASS
Bass could have been staged more imaginatively than just a ‘talking
head.’”97
While the viewer learns something about the original impetus for a
specific title sequence, Bass’s brief comments do little to explain his methodology or theoretical thinking. Bass reiterates his often-articulated statement that he uses titles in a new way “to actually create a climate for the
story that is about to unfold.” In other words, Bass reinforces the notion
that the credits should be considered a portion of the narrative proper, a
notion he then develops with his examples of sequences as prologues.
Furthermore, Bass places his symbols—whether the golden arm, a watch,
or a cat—at the center of his content discussion but says nary a word
about his techniques. For instance, he mentions the globe at the center of
It’s a . . . Mad World but fails to discuss its animation; nor does he explain
the slow-dissolve technique of Nine Hours to Rama or how specific techniques are appropriate for specific projects.
Indeed, the film is a perfect example of Hollywood’s strategy of dazzling with technique without revealing the actual labor taking place
behind the curtain. Unfortunately, given 16mm film’s normal aspect
ratio, the wide-screen credits for West Side Story, In Harm’s Way, Nine
Hours to Rama, It’s a . . . Mad World, and Grand Prix have been severely
cropped to fit the frame, making it all but impossible to study Bass’s
design. Because Yager is both interlocutor and producer of Bass on Titles,
it is not far-fetched to see the film as part and parcel of his efforts to revitalize the Bass brand and drum up new business opportunities. That
might explain Bass’s closing statement, which highlights his experience in
short films, features, commercials, and work for hire, not just film titles.
Though the film’s original intention may have been educational, its pitch
is more in keeping with an industry demonstration reel. The film’s limited
value as an educational tool thus resides in its documentation of heretofore disparate title sequences and Bass’s statements about them, allowing
students to discuss the Bass style.

The Saul Bass Style
Not surprisingly, given his modernist mentors, Bass gravitated toward
modernist and geometric typefaces rather than Renaissance, Baroque, or
Romantic font styles, which he used only occasionally and for specific
reasons. Unlike some Hollywood title designers, Bass eschewed all forms

94

Film Titles
of iconographic typography as well as most abstracted typography, probably for reasons of legibility. Such ornamentation was thought to be very
old school by modernist designers. Nor did Bass employ any threedimensional typeface styles. Geometric modernist typefaces communicated a more contemporary feel; a precise product of the machine age,
they were cleaner and more legible. Typography had to stand out boldly,
given the many other visual elements competing for the viewer’s attention. Such font styles also correlated more closely with Bass’s overall
design aesthetic, which sought to establish balance, harmony, and contrast through the simplest geometric forms and a geometrically precise
construction of screen space. For example, the strong diagonal design
elements in The Man with the Gold Arm, correlating with the film’s narrative of drug addiction, are stabilized for reader legibility through the
use of a modern font that stresses horizontal and vertical axes. The typography for Seconds functions similarly, although in this case, the contrast is
between optically distorted and irregular photographic images and a
clean, modern typeface. In Bunny Lake Is Missing, the ripped black paper
creates very irregular forms, while the typography underneath is clearly
supported by a grid.
In a sampling of fifty-three credit sequences, Bass preferred sans serif
type, which he used in thirty-seven sequences. Geometric typefaces eliminated serifs and were thought to look cleaner and project modernity.
Indeed, sans serif type styles were preferred by modernist designers at the
Bauhaus and became a hallmark of the international style that influenced
Bass and other American designers after World War II. Thanks to their
simple, legible form, sans serif typefaces were considered more contemporary than the ornamental type styles associated with Art Nouveau and
other nineteenth-century art movements.98 In addition, the choice of type
may have been influenced by the film medium itself, since elaborate serifs
might hinder legibility on a screen with moving images.
In those cases in which Bass chose a serif type, the film subjects were
often historical in nature: Around the World in 80 Days, Cowboy, The Pride
and the Passion, A Walk on the Wild Side, and The Age of Innocence. In
addition, Spartacus features a Roman serif type—appropriate because the
slaves’ uprising against Rome occurred just as serif type was becoming
established in Latin inscription.99 Similarly, utilizing an italicized serif type
for Age of Innocence allowed the Basses not only to re-create the elaborate
late-nineteenth-century serifs of Art Nouveau, thus immersing the viewer

95

SAUL BASS
in the period from the very start, but also to mimic the calligraphy of
Edith Wharton’s original hand-written manuscript of her novel of the
same name. However, there were exceptions to Bass’s use of serifs to signify history, as Saint Joan’s sans serif type demonstrates.
Interestingly, except for the handwritten typography credits for Advise
and Consent, In Harm’s Way, Why Man Creates, and 100 Years of the Telephone, Bass usually eschewed handcrafted lettering to mimic calligraphy.
He preferred to create block-print typefaces that were slightly imperfect
(Saint Joan and Exodus); looked scrawled, like writing on a blackboard or
graffiti on a brick wall (Not with My Wife, You Don’t and West Side Story,
respectively); or were written by his own hand (Why Man Creates and A
Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese). Such hand-produced typography,
which had fallen out of fashion earlier in the century, had been revived by
fine artists working in design in the 1950s.100 The title Bunny Lake Is Missing is also handmade in slightly irregular block print that changes color on
the last word, reflecting the film’s ambiguous narrative, while the credits
use a modernist geometric font. The credit sequence for Around the
World in 80 Days ends with a highly stylized cursive title card, giving it a
romantic, nineteenth-century air of adventure (in keeping with Jules
Verne), although all the previous credits used a print typography. Finally,
the title sequence for The Seven Year Itch utilizes a handcrafted print with
extreme serifs and very fanciful lettering; this lack of modernist simplicity
contrasts with the high-art modernism of Bass’s color boxes, which pay
homage to Paul Klee. In the case of these hand-produced types, Bass deviated from the Bauhaus model, which sought to eliminate the hand of the
individual artist in favor of a more mechanical, objective style.101 Indeed,
Bass emphasized the creative hand of the artist in all his work, most prominently in Why Man Creates.
Bass also strove to create a typographical look that created large geometric fields balanced across the screen space. To give the text a block
look, Bass demonstrated a preference for large and small capital letters in
his title sequences. Because capital letters have a uniform height, the letters and lines of text look almost box-like, thereby emphasizing the rectangular shape of the screen space occupied by text; lowercase letters, in
contrast, create lines with irregular contours at the top.102 Modernist
typography designers from the 1920s, such as Herbert Bayer and Jan
Tschichold, advocated abolishing upper- and lowercase altogether for the
sake of simplicity and legibility.103 In his title sequences, Bass employed

96

Film Titles
capital letters either exclusively (Anatomy of a Murder, Storm Center,
Saint Joan, A Bronx Tale, and Casino) or in conjunction with a more conventional capitalization scheme, choosing to designate either names or
credits in all caps (Carmen Jones, Attack! The Racers, Something Wild,
Around the World in 80 Days, Walk on the Wild Side, Exodus, Nine Hours
to Rama, Bunny Lake Is Missing, In Harm’s Way, The War of the Roses,
and Mr. Saturday Night). For The Pride and the Passion, Bass used all caps
only for the names in the technical credits.
Bass preferred white lettering on dark, multicolored, or moving surfaces, although he employed black type when confronted with a white
surface, as in Bunny Lake Is Missing and The War of the Roses. The former
necessitated a switch from black to white for the director’s credit, whereas
in The Big Knife, the director’s credit switched from white to black type.
Bass sometimes alternated between black and white lettering, as in Cowboy. He rarely employed a variety of colors (an exception was Not with My
Wife, You Don’t), possibly in reaction to the garish and oversaturated reds
used for numerous film titles in the 1950s. Indeed, Hollywood films shot
in color in the 1950s and 1960s overwhelmingly utilized reds and strong
yellows for their title credits. Bass employed those colors in his images,
not in his texts. Not until the 1990s would Elaine and Saul Bass use red
typography for films, such as Goodfellas and Higher Learning. The preference for white type makes sense in terms of legibility, not only for blackand-white films but also for the busyness of color cinematography,
particularly if the backgrounds consist of live-action images. Colored type
lacks contrast or, conversely, creates an unwanted illusion of dimension.104
Black lettering threatens to get lost in the background, whereas white lettering tends to pop forward, as if it is above the background image (this
occurs because black absorbs light, while white reflects it). Also, because
color can have a whole set of symbolic associations, as well as communicate emotions such as intensity, excitement, or calmness, Bass may have
been reluctant to give the text such emotional weight.105 Finally, Bass’s
layout of the typography within the screen frame privileged a geometric
ordering of the text, balancing right and left, and with text fields rigorously structured along central vertical and horizontal axes.
The size of the screen frame changed radically during the 1950s
with the new wide-screen aspect ratios of Hollywood films. When the
decade began, the “Academy aperture” was still the absolute norm;
wide-screen formats with different aspect ratios—from Cinerama (2.6:1)

97

SAUL BASS
to Cinemascope (2.55:1)—were introduced after 1953, before Bass created his first titles for Carmen Jones. For decades, the Academy aspect
ratio (1.37:1) had been considered ideal because it was thought to conform more or less to the golden mean, as defined by some introductory film texts.106 The “golden section” or “divine proportion” (a/b =
b/[a + b], where a is the short side and b is the long side of a rectangle)
was used by mathematicians and architects, going back to the ancient
Egyptians, to establish harmony and order, and it was a design principle
of classical painting, architecture, and graphic design.107 In fact, the ratio
of the golden mean (1.66:1) is identical to the flat, wide-screen format
of many modern European films and closer to the format of flat, widescreen American films (1:85:1) than to Academy aperture; yet for
decades, cinematographers argued that the Academy ratio was the most
aesthetically pleasing for dramatic content. Although some of Bass’s
credit sequences were for films that still used the Academy ratio (The Big
Knife, Storm Center, Edge of the City), most had transitioned to widescreen formats, which may have encouraged Bass to play with unconventional text placements.
Whether filmed in Academy aspect ratio or wide-screen formats,
Bass’s titles achieved a unified look by organizing the design elements
asymmetrically on a mathematically precise grid, employing sans serif
type, and utilizing right or left justification (mirroring the screen’s frame),
just as Bauhaus artists and post–World War II International Typographic
Style designers had done.108 The basis for a mathematical screen grid was
the establishment of a horizontal axis and a vertical axis, cutting the frame
into four equal rectangles, which allowed Bass to create architectural
structures within the two-dimensional screen space. The underlying grid
was largely invisible, but in North by Northwest, the grid is taken from a
building façade and then abstracted to allow the text to move along its
lines. Given that film credits have to be clearly legible and create a hierarchy of names and positions, Bass employed text fields within the larger
space of the frame. Allowing text sizes to be dictated by overall design,
opening up the screen to permit “empty” areas without text, creating text
blocks and patterns, and paying strict attention to typography were all
revolutionary concepts in an industry where attention to the details of
title design was an anomaly.
But using a graphic designer’s grid also meant that Bass’s title designs
were overwhelmingly two-dimensional; he only rarely utilized the third

98

Film Titles
dimension of cinematic space, as some contemporary designers have
done. Indeed, while some graphic designers (e.g., typographer Jan Tschichold) attempted to create the illusion of a third dimension on the page
in their print work, Bass’s title work remained resolutely two-dimensional,
even when he employed live-action images behind his titles. Even those
that depicted three-dimensional spaces (e.g., The Big Country, The Cardinal) flattened the image, treating the frame conceptually as a two-dimensional space. Bass almost always preferred lateral, horizontal movement or
background images that flattened out space through their design. This
attitude, which film theorists have characterized as seeing the cinematic
screen as a two-dimensional frame rather than as a window onto a threedimensional space, also characterized Bass’s work as a film director and
was in keeping with his preference for montage over long takes and
extended camera movement.
Bass’s titles almost always gave preference to lines and blocks of text
above the frame’s horizontal axis or directly below it, which conformed to
the conventions established by studio and Pacific Title designers. But
there were exceptions. For The Big Country, most of the credits are located
in the bottom quarter of the screen, probably because Bass and Wyler
wanted to communicate the vastness of the western landscapes in the
background images. For Advise and Consent, the main actors’ credits also
appear centered at the bottom of the screen, while the top half is covered
with the continual, uneven movement of the stripes of an American flag,
as if it were waving in the wind. This creates a dynamic contrast between
the symbolic weight of the flag, as an icon of American democracy, and
the actors who play participants in the drama of that democracy. For technical credits, Bass more often created blocks of text in the lower half of the
frame with a smaller typeface, giving the text a foundational weight. In a
number of sequences, Bass utilized the horizontal axis as a railroad along
which to move text from offscreen space, as in Psycho or, more prominently, Goodfellas. With The Cardinal, Bass centered the head title, then
used dissolves to move the main actors’ credits along the horizontal axis,
a device he repeated in Cape Fear.
In title sequences from early in his career, Bass rarely centered the
credits (which was the conventional practice), except when only one credit
appeared on the screen. Rather, Bass rigorously utilized a vertical axis to
balance text on the left and right sides of the frame, often alternating text
from one side to the other. For example, in the titles for Anatomy of a

99

SAUL BASS
Murder, the credits are placed inside or around various cutout shapes of
body parts that cross the vertical axis with every new title. Even the head
title, with its abstracted corpse cut in half by the vertical axis, seems less
than centered because the title is read on two lines screen left and one line
screen right. Age of Innocence, like so many other Bass credits, also alternates text left and right from title to title. Such a back-and-forth movement forces the viewer to move his or her gaze left and right, actively
searching for the text. It also connects one frame to the next in a much
more dynamic fashion than just leaving the viewer to stare at evolving
texts centered squarely in the frame. This principle is already evident in
Bass’s first title sequence for Carmen Jones, where he alternates between
single lines of text on the horizontal axis and lists of credits to the right of
the vertical axis, then places left- and right-justified text along both edges
of the frame for the technical credits.
Bass was extremely consistent in his use of right- or left-justified text
for multiple credits. With Carmen Jones, this left and right justification
caused the center justification to be ragged, leaving space in the center
frame for the sequence’s image of a burning flame and also mimicking the
movement of the flame. Numerous other sequences feature technical
credits that alternate between left and right justification from title to title.
In some cases, such as when Bass is dealing with two columns of text, he
employs a center justification for the two columns, giving the impression
of order at the center and a ragged feeling at the edges. According to one
design theorist, such a flush-left, ragged-right composition evokes “the
continued flirtation with order and chaos.”109 Indeed, the push and pull
between stability and motion must have been central to Bass’s design concept for film titles: there is not one example of justified text (where the
spacing between letters and words is irregular) blocks (rather than single
lines of text) in Bass’s work. Completely unjustified text is only slightly
less rare, appearing in The Seven Year Itch and The Man with the Golden
Arm. In the former case, the credits appear in rectangular boxes, mitigating the impression of the unjustified text; in the latter case, the horizontal
typography contrasts with the strong diagonal lines, mirroring a narrative
of drug addiction.
Thus, we can conclude that Bass rejected the conventional, centered
film titles that Hollywood had been producing for decades. He sought to
create dynamic movement that fluctuated between stability and disorder
by utilizing the entire frame as his canvas, creating weight and counter-

100

Film Titles
weight with blocks of text and left or right justification. Bass’s designs, like
those of the Constructivists in the Soviet Union, the German Bauhaus
artists, and De Stijl designers in Holland, were based on mathematical
grids.110 The use of grids is standard procedure for book and magazine
designers, allowing them to organize content on a page and ensure that
margins and other features are considered in relation to text. Such grids
can be visible or invisible, directing the eye to various points on the page.
According to Martin Solomon, creating a grid “to break down your space
mathematically, you become aware of the energy forces within each segment and how the size and shape of each element relates to the whole.”111
At the same time, Bass often turned the seriousness of the undertaking on
its head, ending his title sequences with a humorous coda or a visual pun
that acted as a final exclamation point to the sequence. A perfect example
of this stylistic device, which Bass implemented repeatedly, is the visual
and aural spring that pops Billy Wilder’s directorial credit out of the
sequence’s abstract color grid like a jack-in-the-box, cuing the audience to
the fact that Some Like It Hot is a comedy.

Moving Graphics: Psycho, Higher Learning, Goodfellas
After hiring Bass to create the titles for Vertigo and North by Northwest,
Hitchcock again turned to him not only to design the titles but also to act
as a visual consultant for particular scenes in Psycho (1960), sending him
the first twenty pages of the script on 10 November 1959. Valuing the
innovative eye of the designer, Hitchcock was particularly interested in
having Bass storyboard several problem areas rather than asking his staff
illustrator, Joseph Hurley, to do so.112 These included the shower scene,
the Arbogast murder, the revelation of Mother, and the view of the
haunted house. Bass was supposed to be paid $10,000 for thirteen half
days of work over thirteen consecutive weeks, as well as $2,000 extra for
the storyboards, but he ultimately took home $17,000 for all his work on
the film.113 The titles were done at National Screen Service at a cost of
$21,000.
Although Bass designed most if not all of his titles with an invisible
grid (as simple as x- and y-axes), the grid construction itself is a manifest
and self-reflective theme in the credit sequence for Psycho. Here (and not
for the last time) Bass creates credits that are virtually pure graphics in
motion. The text functions on a semantic level as well as visually, moving,

101

SAUL BASS
constantly forming and re-forming in different patterns. Bass described
the project as follows: “The entire title is designed on a module of black
bars of equal weight, which slide onto the screen horizontally or vertically
in various patterns. Parts of each credit are carried on different bars. When
they are in proper conjunction, the typographic elements line up to create
a legible credit designation. The entire effect is harsh, strident, and somewhat unpredictable, as a reflection of those qualities that give the film its
particular character.”114
The thick gray and black lines that form vertically and horizontally at
varying rates, as well as the fractured white typography that flows from
illegibility to legibility and back again, move along evenly spaced, vertically and horizontally structured axes. Likewise, Bass contrasts the invisible central axis, from which lines emanate or into which they are absorbed,
to the ragged edges formed by the lines moving offscreen. This theme of
order and chaos manifests itself as soon as the film’s head title rolls into
view: Bass slices the white typography of “ALFRED HITCHCOCK’S”
into three horizontal chains of typographical fragments that enter the
screen space on parallel tracks from opposite directions, so that only when
the middle chain is in place in the center of the screen does the type
become legible. The typography is thus first understood by the viewer as
pure form, decipherable only at the point of perception and reception,
surrounded, as it were, by abstracted moving forms. Bass constructs a
visual symphony in dissonant tones that Raymond Durgnat correctly
identifies as “extending the tradition of Eggeling, Ruttmann, Lye,
MacLaren.”115
After the typography breaks up again and moves offscreen as fragments, “PSYCHO” becomes legible in the center of the screen in the
same manner, moving from data to message. Bass adds a tickler by having
the tripartite typography shudder or stutter before disappearing into
black; it then reappears, now sliced horizontally in two, with half moving
up offscreen and the other half moving down offscreen. This type of little
surprise is not uncommon in Bass’s title work, presaging here the surprises
revealed in the film. James Counts quotes Harold Adler, who describes
how this complicated work was done before the digital age:
The production team for the Psycho credit sequence settled on a
configuration of over thirty parallel bars for each field. Adler, who
handled the horizontal bar movements, explained, “We got six

102

Film Titles
foot-long aluminum bars and sprayed them black. We worked on
a large white painted plywood board with push-pins to guide the
bars. The bars had to follow a straight line and couldn’t wiggle.
Paul (Stoleroff) and I manually pushed in each bar at predetermined distances and speeds. Each bar was precisely timed by
numbers of frames per second, called ‘counts.’ Each bar had to be
pushed in and shot separately. Once a bar had gone across the
screen, it was tied down. There were lots of retakes because they’d
come in crooked.”116
The letters that split into two halves and move offscreen in different
directions also function as a trope for the deeply schizophrenic state of the
central protagonist, whose personality has split to make room for his dead
mother. Such animated typography can be read by the audience as
“creepy,” in keeping with the horror film to follow, just as the severed
parts of meaningful words can be seen as a trope for the bodies of the victims in the narrative to come. Bernard Herrmann’s strikingly dissonant
opening music punctuates the credits with shrill sections corresponding
to the breakup of the letters. That auditory and visual cue signals the mental breakdown of the central character. Bass thus submits to the strict confines of the grid in his movement of lines and type, but he is also aware of
the unpredictability of time within his constructed space, giving birth to
moments of chaos.
Throughout the following credits, Bass continues the push and pull
between order and instability. While most of the main actors’ credits are
centered and solitary on the screen, the stability of block lettering for legibility is brief; the hustle and bustle of movement soon continues. Bass
sticks to white typography, which he divides into capital letters of two different sizes and weights—larger for names, and smaller for job titles or
special remarks. Along with the sans serif, modernist block typeface, capital letters give the impression of fitting easily into the grooves that carry
text to and away from their destination on the screen. In contrast, Bass
creates weak vertical axes by having some of the technical credits centerjustified with two columns of text, creating unstable ragged edges of text
that are always threatening to fall over if the base is too narrow. These
invisible vertical axes constructed of center-justified text are themselves
sometimes placed off center, adding to the compositional instability. And
yet these same vertical axes sometimes explode outward, with text flying,

103

SAUL BASS
or are forged from the collision of text. Bass increases the unpredictability
quotient by having text move either vertically or horizontally off the grid;
the switch occurs without apparent logic, like the murders themselves.
For example, the name John Gavin appears on a vertical axis but moves
offscreen on a horizontal one.
Bass engages in formal play with the grid by actually constructing its
visible form through color typography (i.e., a letter’s density, measured on
a gray scale). Here, Bass articulates levels of visibility and contrast in
typography by alternating gray and black lines; the gray appears to be
white until actual white typography glides along the gray and black grid.
Bass also has the screen go totally black, establishing a new zero point for
any colored lettering to come. The horizontal construction of space into
light and dark lines of equal size creates a venetian blind effect in the credits that can be interpreted as a trope for the film’s theme of observation
and punishment.117 Indeed, the film’s first few live-action shots explicitly
suggest this theme, as the camera zooms in on a darkened hotel window
with venetian blinds that are mostly closed, then raised in the next scene
as Marion’s illicit lover opens the blinds after they’ve had sex. Here, the
viewer is explicitly placed in the uncomfortable position of being a voyeur,
a Peeping Tom viewing a primal scene. As elsewhere in the narrative, the
blinds create a barrier to vision but also allow those inside to gaze out
without being seen. In the first scene, the blinds form a pattern of gray
and white lines on the faces of the lovers, a typical film noir visual trope
that signifies the characters’ moral ambiguity but also mirror the titles.
Finally, the blinds remind us of Bass’s graphic design work, where he
would often slice a photographic image into strips, forcing the viewer to
reconstruct the whole image mentally (e.g., his trade advertisement for
Attack! or his window cards for Anatomy of a Murder).
Horizontal lines thus govern a symphony of movement along a strict
grid, but the highlighted typography is always more unstable than stable,
always attempting to achieve stability of form and then falling into chaos.
Just as the film’s narrative leads the viewer to identify with a character
(played by Janet Leigh) and then eliminates her, throwing the viewer into
turmoil, the titles oscillate between legibility and illegibility, order and
chaos. And to make that point, the horizontal grid itself deconstructs after
Hitchcock’s severed directorial credit simultaneously moves up and down
the grid into offscreen space, while bars slowly disappear into a central
horizontal axis. Only then does a live-action shot of a sun-baked city dis-

104

Film Titles
solve out of the wreckage. Thus, through purely graphic means, Bass’s
Psycho titles create an objective correlative to Hitchcock’s fractured
narrative.
Thirty-five years later, Bass (and his wife Elaine) would construct a
similar grid-based title sequence, again employing moving type in shades
of black, white, and gray, but without the metaphoric elements featured
in Psycho. For John Singleton’s third feature, Higher Learning (1995),
Bass would reuse some of Psycho’s formal design elements to the tune of a
hip-hop sound track, while turning the grid forty-five degrees to create
strong diagonal movement within the film’s frame. One might argue that
the diagonal movement of text on- and offscreen mirrors the learning
curve experienced by the racially and culturally diverse students in the film
as they try to accept one another as human beings and live together harmoniously on campus. However, the titles here have seemingly little symbolic meaning in relation to the film’s narrative. This was not always the
case.
As Bass’s initial design proposals demonstrate, he originally wanted to
begin with a word cloud that visualized racial prejudice by articulating
various racial slurs: First the word “nigger” appears in the top left quadrant in white text on an all-black screen, followed by “White Boy” in the
opposite quadrant, slightly lower. Then “fag,” “kike,” and “lesbo” appear
above the first two words, while “bitch” and “skinhead” appear below.
More and more pejorative terms appear until the screen is literally filled
with them, except for a black space in the center of the screen. (Bass used
the same idea in Why Man Creates, where numbers gradually blacken a
white screen.) As the white typography begins to fade, the word “unlearn”
appears in red at the center. Bass and Singleton thus offer a solution to
racial prejudice and other forms of discrimination to both the audience
and the characters. When all the other words have faded to black, the
“un” disappears and is replaced by the film’s title in red: Higher Learning.118 This “teaser” before the head title was apparently still planned as
late as two months after initial discussions between Bass and the producers, but was not included in the final production in November.119 The use
of such crude language was apparently too inflammatory for the producers at Columbia, because all that remains of the concept is the film’s final
image: an American flag over which the word “unlearn” is typed in black
Times New Roman letters. That word then dissolves into the same bright
red of the head title before fading out for the non-Bass end titles.

105

SAUL BASS
The film’s approved title sequence also ends with the American flag.
After Singleton’s directorial credit zooms offscreen, the chimes of a campus clock are heard while the screen remains black for a couple of seconds
before cutting to an American flag that fills the screen; then the camera
pans 180 degrees to reveal a student demonstration. The full-screen flag,
with its strong horizontal red and white stripes, functions first as a visual
shock after the powerful diagonals and monochromatic design of the previous titles, jolting the viewer kinesthetically, as the original opening
design would have done intellectually. More important, bracketing Higher
Learning’s narrative with the American flag signals that the multiethnic
campus of Columbus University is a microcosm for the nation as a whole.
Formally, the tiles remain consistent with the Bass brand in terms of
both the grid construction and the layout of text on the screen. Utilizing
a modern block font, Bass contrasts the black screen with white type for
names and gray type for designations. The letters are all capitals and sans
serif, probably the Compacta font discussed with the producers.120 The
film opens with hip-hop music and a black screen; then each word shoots
diagonally into the frame from the bottom left corner, covering that
whole quadrant of the screen: “COLUMBIA PICTURES PRESENTS.”
The words then shoot up the same diagonal line and exit the frame at the
top, screen right. “A FILM BY JOHN SINGLETON” enters from the
bottom at the same angle but shifted to the right, so it is slightly off center, and exits as before. The red head title, dissected horizontally, enters
from the top and bottom of the screen diagonally, coming to rest and
forming legible words just off center, in the same place as the previous
credit. The head title is the only one in which Bass utilizes the same kind
of horizontally split lettering used in Psycho; it also changes color, while all
the other titles are monochromatic. Here, the split seems to have no metaphoric function. Its legibility is delayed until the title comes to rest, while
the change to red may be intended only to make the title pop or to connect formally with the American flag that follows.
The following actors’ credits all move similarly onto and off this diagonal grid, coming to rest at various points on the screen either individually
or in groups, alluding to the similarities and differences of the students
who are the subject of the film. The next set of technical credits switches
to a strictly horizontal and vertical grid, appearing right-justified on either
the left or right side of the screen, just above the horizontal axis. These
include the single screen credit for Saul and Elaine Bass, indicating the

106

Film Titles
importance of their work in the context of the whole production. After
the music credit for jazz musician Stanley Clarke, the titles return to a
diagonal grid for the production designer and subsequent major credits,
including Singleton’s credit for writing and directing. As in the case of
Psycho, the credits are constantly moving (except for a brief moment to
allow the viewer to read them), with Bass giving explicit instructions to
“start each title card immediately after the previous one exits. No black
between cards.”121 Indeed, the text’s movement is driven by the steady
beat of the hip-hop music.
Finally, Bass and Singleton’s decision to create titles that eschew
images and use only words suggests, like the rejected teaser, that the film
itself is very much about language. Words are used both to hurt, by prejudiced students, and to educate and enlighten, by the likes of Laurence
Fishburne, who plays an African American college professor and campus
wiseman. With Higher Learning, then, Bass not only makes the movement of text within a grid the most important design element in his titles;
he also emphasizes the logocentric nature of the college learning
experience.
The Martin Scorsese film Goodfellas (1990) is another example of
Bass’s love of mathematically precise grids and purely graphic titling, here,
framing Scorsese’s visual and narrative sensibility. Opening his film with a
deceptively simple visual concept that has Bass’s signature all over it, the
director pays tribute to one of his personal idols while simultaneously
interpolating a raw and brutal live-action scene of a mob killing, a Scorsese trademark. Reducing his grid to a single horizontal axis, Bass again
moves his typography to play the game of illegibility-legibility.
Scorsese was always a huge Bass fan. The director states the following
in his foreword to the Bass and Kirkham book: “Saul Bass. Before I ever
met him, before we worked together, he was a legend in my eyes.”122 Elsewhere, Scorsese relates that, as a teenager, he would storyboard Bass’s
titles, not even knowing who the artist was.123 Scorsese appreciated Bass’s
vision and his ability to find unique solutions to the problem of film titles:
“His title sequences are films in and of themselves. . . . They have the ability to capture the tone of a work in actual images. Like candy, a constant
originality.” Scorsese probably would have worked with Bass sooner, but
he didn’t know whether Bass was still in the business or even alive. According to one source, Scorsese had hired Kyle Cooper to do the titles for
Goodfellas, but Cooper was having trouble coming up with a metaphor.

107

SAUL BASS
When the director expressed regret that Bass was no longer working,
Cooper informed him that Bass was still around and promptly talked himself out of a job.124 Scorsese relates his rediscovery of Bass differently: “I
saw War of the Roses (1989) and saw that Bass was still working. On Goodfellas, I knew where the credits were going to go, but couldn’t make them
work with the typography we had. I told Barbara de Fina, we need to get
Bass here and within one or two tries, he got it.”125 In another interview,
Scorsese confided that when he saw Big (1988), he realized Bass was still
alive and working.126
In fact, preliminary designs in the Saul Bass Collection demonstrate
that he made a number of proposals that were apparently rejected. Several
designs re-created the look of Bunny Lake Is Missing, whereby each new
title was ripped away by hand and then replaced with the following title.
Another design utilized block type and a thick white line under each major
credit, similar to Bass’s titles for Big. A third design was significantly more
complicated and involved putting each credit onscreen twice. The first
time, the credit appeared as gray block capital letters, tightly bunched up
and completely filling every square inch of the screen, almost like a background image. The second, more legible version of the credit appeared in
white sans serif lettering in normal-sized type with only the first letter in
caps.127 Here, Bass was riffing on an idea he had worked out in the poster
for The Cardinal. It is unclear whether Bass shared these designs with
Scorsese and they were rejected, or whether they were just preliminary
sketches.
The film opens with the words “WARNER BROTHERS PRESENTS” in light gray Helvetica modern type zooming along a horizontal
track just above the center frame from screen right, coming to rest at center frame, then zooming off, screen left, like a car passing in the night; in
fact, a car is heard driving on the sound track.128 All the letters are uppercase, creating a train-in-the-night effect, or a rectangular design, when the
typography comes to rest. The next above-the-title credit—“AN IRWIN
WINKLER PRODUCTION”—enters from screen right along the same
horizontal track and exits screen left, as does “A MARTIN SCORSESE
PICTURE.” The following major actors’ credits appear from screen left
and exit screen right. While the credits are moving, the typography is
blurred and illegible until it rests at center screen. Once again, Bass is playing with the legibility-illegibility dichotomy, utilizing the vertical axis as
his train station. One critic compared the brief moment when the typog-

108

Film Titles
raphy comes to rest with the later freeze frames that introduce flashbacks:
“At various moments, Scorsese freezes Henry’s life in mid-action, usually
so that Henry can narrate how significant the moment was to his life at
the time.”129
Once the title for Paul Sorvino exits screen right, a white title fades in
(rather than moving in), announcing that the following is a true story.
The film then cuts to a live-action shot of a late 1960s American car (presumably the one heard on the sound track) pulling away into the darkness, followed by another white title on a black background indicating
that the story takes place in New York, 1970. In the following live-action
sequence, a group of gangsters driving in a car stops to get out and shoot
a noisy, struggling body wrapped in white sheets in the car’s trunk. Cutting from a shot of the blood-splattered bedsheets in the trunk, the camera comes to rest in close-up on actor Ray Liotta—playing the “hero,”
Henry Hill—his face bathed in a red glow emanating from the car’s tail
lights, before fading out to black. The credits then resume with the film’s
title, in capital letters and bright red type, zooming from screen left to
center frame and then exiting screen right. The remaining major credits
follow, moving in and out of frame (sometimes changing direction) in the
same fashion, but in white type and with the names in capital letters and
the designations in regular script.130 In some cases, the designation appears
on a second line above the credit, but it moves through the frame in sync
with the name.
The decision by Bass and Scorsese to move the typography along a
single track in and out of the frame, interrupted by an incredibly violent
action scene, can be interpreted in several different ways. First, the stark
simplicity and mathematical precision of the typography contrast with the
messy, ugly, and banal illogic of the murder that occurs in the film’s opening moments, just as the black and white of the titles contrasts with the
color action scene. The sound track of the moving car and the black background mirroring the nighttime scene create continuity and a semantic
connection. Second, the linearity and one-dimensionality of the typographical movement express a degree of inevitability in the narrative.
Once on a train, there is no changing course after it has left the station;
likewise once one has chosen the life of a gangster, there is no way out. In
this context, one might interpret the movement of titles from left to right,
and then from right to left, as reflecting the two first-person narratives
that structure the diegesis: that of Henry and his Jewish wife, Karen.

109

SAUL BASS
Another critic has noted that the horizontal movement of the titles reflects
Hill’s inability to move up through the ranks of the Mafia because he is
only half Italian and can’t be “made.”131 Ironically, gangster Henry Hill
eventually turns state’s evidence, thus beating the odds of getting out of
the “life.” Indeed, the viewer later realizes that it is this first messy killing
that leads Hill to rethink his life in the Mafia.
The visual connection between the blood on the sheet covering the
corpse in the trunk, Hill’s red-tinted face (reflecting the car’s brake lights),
and the red typeface of the film’s title reinforces the notion that the life of
a gangster is exceedingly violent and possibly fatal. Given Scorsese’s Catholic background, one might also argue that the viewer is witnessing a
scene from hell or a warning that committing a mortal sin (murder) will
lead to hell. At the same time, the intimacy of the scene—in particular,
Scorsese’s close-up of Hill—not only reflects the hero’s realization
(revealed much later) that he is metaphorically in hell but also implicates
the viewer as a witness to the murder and thereby complicit in it. Finally,
the metaphoric quality of the title design as a moving train contrasts with
the two static, diegetic titles that identify the narrative’s time and place.
Employing normal typography rather than stylized capital letters for these
two titles increases their credibility, as does the fact that Scorsese captures
the murder scene with what appears to be available light and a handheld
camera. In the film that follows, Scorsese observes with documentary precision a group of “wise guys” over a thirty-year career. Bass’s achievement
was to encapsulate that experience into a single formal metaphor for the
titles, as he had done so often before.

Animation: Bonjour Tristesse, The Pride and the Passion
As in the case of the titles for Saint Joan, which Bass had produced for
Preminger a year earlier, his titles for Bonjour Tristesse (1958) expanded
his repertoire of techniques beyond the grid, creating a visually stimulating background rather than animating the credits themselves. Both credit
sequences are structured the same way: typography appears over a background of animated objects, with the final title reproducing the signature
image-logo used in the poster and the advertising campaign.132 In the case
of Saint Joan, ringing church bells morph into the sword and truncated
body armor of the heroine. In the popular imagination, bells have always
signified the arrival of good or bad news or warnings of danger; here, they

110

Film Titles
proclaim the arrival of France’s tragic liberator.133 In Bonjour Tristesse,
flowers turn into a single teardrop on an abstracted, gender-neutral face,
with hearts in its eyes and a tabula rasa mouth, signifying the melancholy
of the human condition. Placement of the typography in both cases was
still subject to an underlying grid, with text appearing in relation to both
a horizontal and a vertical axis. Thus, in Bonjour Tristesse, Bass constructs
a dichotomy between the formalized structure of the text and the seemingly serendipitous, playful flow of colored objects, the latter associated
with the subjective musings of the teenage girl at the center of François
Sagan’s novel and Otto Preminger’s film. Bass himself noted in an early
New York Times interview: “I tried to evolve an image which would have
the full meaning of the words ‘good morning sadness’ and would immediately convey the feeling of a young girl robbed of the normal joys of
youth, who has lived a lifetime during her adolescence.”134 Preminger
thus films the past in color and the present in black and white, since Cecile
(Jean Seberg) cannot overcome the melancholy resulting from her role in
the death of Anne (Deborah Kerr), the woman her father (David Niven)
had hoped to marry.
Saul Bass’s career as a title designer had begun only three years earlier,
and he was already carving out a reputation in Hollywood. As one critic
wrote of the teardrop-adorned face of a young girl that would function as
the poster and the final image in Bass’s titles for Bonjour Tristesse: “It is the
special translation of a tall, crew-cut, 37-year-old industrial designer, Saul
Bass, whose drawings among artistic and captivating movie titles and
credits on the screen have attracted unprecedented attention in recent
seasons.”135 Variety critic Gene Moskowitz also commented favorably on
Bass’s “colorful and clever” titles, while giving the film itself a decidedly
mixed review for its “script deficiencies and awkward reading.”136
Bonjour Tristesse opens with the words “OTTO PREMINGER
PRESENTS” placed just below the central horizontal axis (Bass’s favorite
location for titles) in a wide-screen (Cinemascope) space. Placing the
typography below the horizontal axis gives it weight within the compositional space of the screen. The white, sans serif, block capital letters begin
just to the left of the central vertical axis; the text is right-justified, anchoring the title and leading the eye to an offscreen space. To mitigate the
imbalance created between the left and right screen halves, Bass creates an
upside-down arc of four cutout circles that appear sequentially in shades
of dirty yellow, brown, and off-white, just above the horizontal axis but

111

SAUL BASS
starting at the frame’s right edge and continuing to the vertical axis. The
resulting composition contrasts objects and text—the arc versus the
straight line, color versus black and white (as in the film)— yet it also creates compositional balance. This composition does not remain stable for
long, however. Rather, we see multicolored circles as well as hand-drawn
crosses and stars that flash on and off irregularly above the title, in the top
half of the wide-screen space. Bass described what he was doing:
The title signals the diverse mode of gaiety and sadness in the film
itself. It opens with random forms popping which are gay in color
and playful in tempo. At first, one form predominates and then
another. Slowly the mood changes and the color deepens and
becomes more somber. As it begins to assume more forbidding
tones, the forms, which were vaguely flower-like, become more
specifically so, developing petal-like shapes. The petals form an
overall pattern of dropping petals, which cover the screen at one
point. Finally only one petal is left. The face (the symbol for the
entire campaign) forms around it and we see that the petal is
really a tear.137
This after-the-fact description does not necessarily jibe with the emotional
experience of viewing. In fact, the yellow-brown colors are associated with
the girl, in particular, her bathroom. And rather than expressing “gaity,”
they appear during moments of anger and jealousy. Furthermore, the
continual appearance-disappearance of the shapes functions as a metaphor
for the violently variable moods of the teenager. Yet, like the film itself,
which begins in the present before transitioning to flashbacks, the overall
tenor is that of melancholy.
As the opening credit fades out, it is replaced by a credit for Deborah
Kerr, placed on the same horizontal axis but justified at screen right.
Objects continue to be seen above it, mostly in the top right quadrant,
again balancing the composition. Next, David Niven’s credit appears at
center screen but well below the central horizontal axis, framed screen
right by seven irregularly placed circles and crosses. As the major actors’
credits continue to fade in and out, singly or in groups, they always appear
in relation to the central axes, with the cutout icons placed strategically
around the typography and sometimes overlapping each other. With the
final set of actors’ credits, the button-like shapes change color to blue and

112

Film Titles
purple and create a transition to the film’s head title: “IN BONJOUR
TRISTESSE.” The title is placed in the same position as the opening
credit, but screen right, with several burnt red and blue stars to the right,
above the title, and one star below the title at screen left, again balancing
the overall composition.
The following major credits continue this pattern, appearing as blackand-white text in various quadrants of the frame, counterbalanced and
framed by blue flower shapes. These blue flowers begin to open up into
four distinct petals; then individual petals start dropping down off the
screen as the white typography of the technical credits appears over them,
left-justified. As in the case of the major credits (other than actors), the
designations appear in capital letters but in a smaller type size than the
names. Once again, the use of small and large capital letters creates twodimensional spaces of color out of typography, allowing Bass to contrast
rectangular and irregular shapes within the frame. The petals turn into
blue raindrops—some lighter, some darker; some seemingly closer and
others farther away—as the technical credits roll. One critic has described
the “narrative arc” of the sequence: “The themes of passion, metamorphosis, sexual awakening, and melancholy that mark the progress of the
film all find resonance in these titles.”138 Bass thus aligns virtually abstract,
slightly anthropomorphic shapes with the conflicting emotions of Cecile.
Indeed, some of the shapes resemble the roses that ornament the heroine’s mirror, which she uses to abuse herself in a moment of
self-loathing.
The final image of the face with a single teardrop perched on its
cheek—the face light blue and the tear a darker blue—forms a cross with
Preminger’s credit as producer and director, which appears on the horizontal axis. The drawing, unlike the previous abstract shapes, was accomplished with no more than a few bold strokes of oil paint or chalk, recalling
Picasso in its utter simplicity, with echoes of so-called primitive art as filtered through the early-twentieth-century French modernists. The same
image is repeated over the end credit, this time with the tear in purple-red.
Bass’s Bonjour Tristesse poster of the iconic physiognomy features an olive
green background and a muted blue face with a black teardrop, colors
that only increase the melancholy of the image. Thus, the colors for Bonjour Tristesse mirror the psychological state of the pubescent heroine. But
the titles, like the poster design, also reference high modernist art. An
abstract painting in the fiancée’s bedroom features two misshaped circles

113

SAUL BASS
of color on a black background, echoing the abstract shapes in Bass’s title
design. Since Anne is an accomplished designer herself, the modernist art
titles also presage what father and daughter will lose with her death—
namely, a seriousness of purpose.
Produced and directed by Stanley Kramer, The Pride and the Passion
was released between Saint Joan and Bonjour Tristesse, but Bass probably
produced the titles around the same time as the former. As noted earlier,
Bass had designed numerous advertising campaigns for Kramer beginning
in the late 1940s. Unlike the titles for the Preminger films, which use animation to move objects in the background, Bass’s titles for The Pride and
the Passion create an animated effect by moving the camera over static artwork to imbue a sense of dynamic movement. Bass also inserts animated
objects over and around the text as dramatic emphasis, while his typography seems less slavishly beholden to the underlying grid structure. Quite
surprisingly, given Bass’s antipathy for colored typography, he employs
yellow text and yellow interpolated objects in an overall red scheme of
background images—the two colors, of course, representing the Spanish
flag. Most unusually, Bass uses the drawings of another famous artist for
his background images—in this case, Francisco Goya—rather than having
his own creative team draw the art. It is unclear whether this was a requirement of Kramer or Bass. As a result, the titles have an uncharacteristic
busyness, given the visual density of Goya’s prints.
The Pride and the Passion is a costume film, taking place during the
Napoleonic occupation of Spain. It tells the story of a Spanish citizen
army that is loyal to the Bourbon monarchy and captures and transports
a giant cannon to attack the French stronghold of Avila in 1810. This is
the backdrop for a love triangle involving Sophia Loren and Frank Sinatra,
who incongruously play Spanish peasants, and Cary Grant, playing a
stranded English naval officer. Shot on location in Spain in VistaVision
and Technicolor with a $4 million budget, Kramer’s film was heavily supported by the fascist government of Generalissimo Franco, which
undoubtedly appreciated the many unmotivated scenes of Catholic pomp
and circumstance, as well as the film’s overt nationalist ideology. In fact,
the Spaniards are vaguely stylized as nascent democrats, while the evil
French are depicted as the authoritarian enemy, even though the historical
reality was the exact opposite—that is, the Spaniards supported a reactionary monarchy against the liberal democratic ideals of the French
Revolution.

114

Film Titles
As in the case of the Preminger films preceding and following it, Bass
was initially hired to design not only the titles but also all the other elements of the campaign, including the trailer and advertising. Indeed, the
template for the contract with Bass was based on a Preminger contract,
according to preproduction documents. However, there was resistance
to Bass’s hiring within the United Artists organization, particularly from
Max E. Youngstein, one of UA’s owners. In a memo to Kramer, Myer P.
Beck noted: “As I believe Max has advised you, he objects to Saul Bass
on The Pride and the Passion for $10,000. Max does not feel that Saul is
right for this picture.”139 Bass’s fee was supposed to cover “all advertising
and promotion material, plus the Fredenthal theatrical subject.”140 Ultimately, Bass designed only the premiere invitation, the titles, and the
trailer.
Ironically (to the knowing viewer), Bass reproduces etchings from
Goya’s The Disasters of War as background images. This cycle of eightytwo prints, which the artist completed between 1810 and 1820 but was
not published in his lifetime, expressed his own ambivalence about the
French invasion. Goya was a Spanish patriot, but as a political liberal, he
was enthusiastic about Napoleonic human rights reforms. Goya’s work
has thus been interpreted as an antiwar statement in which there are only
victims and losers—no winners. But Kramer’s film can hardly be called
pacifist. In particular, Bass utilizes five prints: No. 5 (“And They Are Like
Wild Beasts”), No. 7 (“What Courage”), No. 26 (“One Can’t Look”),
No. 35 (“Nobody Knows Why”), and No. 52 (“No Hagen a Tiempo”;
used in the end credits). As Bass notes in his description of the titles: “The
film concerns itself with the Napoleonic invasion of Spain. The title consists of a series of etchings from Goya’s ‘The Disasters of War,’ overlaid
with flat transparent colors in the sepia, red, orange, brown range. As we
shift from one drawing to another, there is a corresponding color
change.”141 Bass is apparently confusing the title sequence with the trailer,
since the title background images are in fact tinted end-to-end in red,
except for the end credit, which bleeds to orange. But Bass also uses at
least one severely cropped image (“Look What a Tailor Can Do!”) from
another cycle of etchings, Los Caprichos (1799), as background for his
head title. And Bass’s final image in the title sequence comes from an
1820 series of etchings, Prisoner in Chains, showing a peasant shackled
and bound, his body contorted as the chains pull him in two directions.
All of Goya’s images utilized in the titles emphasize subjugation and vio-

115

SAUL BASS
lence against the common people, setting the stage for Kramer’s peasant
liberation narrative.
The credit sequence opens with an all-red screen on which yellow
serif type (possibly Times New Roman) fades in just above the horizontal
axis, filling the left of the screen to just beyond the central vertical axis:
“STANLEY KRAMER PICTURES PRESENTS.” That text dissolves to
“Cary Grant” on the same line, but double in size and right-justified, and
to Goya’s print No. 26 of peasants being executed by French troops. The
camera pans right from the Spaniards to the bayonets pointing at them
from the extreme right of the frame. As the camera comes to rest on a
close-up of the rifles, Grant’s name fades out and Frank Sinatra’s name
fades in on the same line, but left-justified. Interestingly, the bayonets are
not reproduced from Goya’s print; as a close comparison reveals, they
have been redrawn, possibly to produce a more balanced composition
between image and text. That title dissolves to “Sophia Loren in” on the
same horizontal line, from the center to screen right. This is accompanied
by the cropped image from Los Caprichos, whereby the etching of a
woman praying dominates the center of the frame, while screen left features outlines of other praying peasants and screen right remains in darkness. The connection between the image and the text is obvious, given
Loren’s role as a Spanish peasant, but the cropping from a vertical to a
horizontal Cinemascope frame has eliminated the top half of Goya’s
image, which depicts a giant scarecrow. In fact, Bass takes Goya’s
supremely anticlerical print—the tailor of the title represents Spain’s reactionary ruling class, which keeps the people down through superstition
and ignorance—and turns it into a view of religious martyrdom, which is
more in keeping with the film’s overall ideology.142
While this image stays onscreen, the text fades out, followed by the
sequential appearance of at least fourteen irregular bullet holes in yellow
above and below the horizontal axis, followed by the sequential appearance of the title words, with “The Pride” and “Passion” above the central
axis, and the intervening “and the” below it, all accompanied by rousing
Spanish-inflected orchestral music. The re-created muskets and die-cut
bullet holes are also featured on the cover of the program booklet that
Bass designed for the world premiere at the Screen Directors Guild Theatre on 26 June 1957; the inside pages reproduce the Goya prints in various colors.143 (Bass had already used small die-cut circles as bullet holes
over red images of war to great effect in his trade advertisements for

116

Film Titles
Attack! [1956], and he would use them again for an unpublished trade ad
for John Sturges’s western The Magnificent Seven [1960].)144 Two of the
bullet holes cover the woman’s face, possibly foreshadowing the death of
the female lead, but also abstractly visualizing the narrative outcome of
the first Goya image of peasants being executed. This image dissolves to a
close-up of a cannon, a cropped and flipped image from Goya’s print No.
7, with a column of supporting actors’ credits unjustified, screen right,
and in much smaller type. The camera slowly pans left along the cannon’s
barrel, which forms the horizontal axis of the frame, coming to rest on the
woman firing the cannon; once she fills the right side of the screen, various major credits fade in and out above and below the axis. The title ends
with animated lightning bolts (in yellow) emanating from the cannon’s
vent.
The credits then dissolve to a cropped image of a woman thrusting a
lance into the right side of the frame (Goya’s No. 5), the weapon again
forming the central horizontal axis, while the credit for composer George
Antheil becomes visible. Then the camera begins a slow pan to the right
as columns of technical credits, half the size of the previous credits, dissolve in and out, justified either left or right (including Bass’s credit: “titles
designed by”). As more technical credits appear, uncharacteristically
unjustified in the bottom half of the screen, the camera zooms in on the
female cannoneer’s head. As the last credit fades out, the woman’s head
fills the screen and is then obscured by numerous yellow lances entering
at very slight diagonals from screen right and apart from the central horizontal axis, where “produced and directed by Stanley Kramer” appears in
white text over the right two-thirds of the frame in the same size as the
previous major credits but still much smaller than the starring credits.
These remain onscreen as the background image dissolves to an extreme
close-up of the Goya print Prisoner in Chains, depicting the legs and arms
of a shackled peasant. Then, as the credit fades out and the camera pans
vertically up the peasant’s legs, the narrative begins: “It is 1810. . . . The
French legions of Napoleon smash across Spain.” Bass completes the
sequence by wiping the image from the top and bottom until it disappears
at the horizontal axis, the red bleeding out to reveal a Technicolor image
of an army on the march. At the film’s end, the image bleeds to red and a
final Goya print (No. 52) of a hooded peasant woman cradling a dead girl;
the end credits fade in, with two justified columns listing the actors and
their roles, and red dissolves to orange. A final credit for the “SPANISH

117

SAUL BASS
PEOPLE IN THE TENS OF THOUSANDS WHO MADE POSSIBLE
THIS MOTION PICTURE” is punctuated by another strafing of bullet
holes, placed as earlier.
Clearly, Bass chose his background images and cropped them to focus
on women as both victims and aggressors, as well as to highlight the film’s
thesis that the Spanish peasant armies were composed of soldiers of both
genders. But one must also note that the filmmaker eschews the most violent and surrealist images in the Disasters of War cycle, and Goya’s antiwar
sentiment is downplayed in the interest of a nationalist epic. Both the
camera’s movement and Bass’s animated bullet holes and lances are interpolated to abstractly signify the military action at the narrative’s center.
Finally, although Bass employs his trademark central horizontal axis and
balanced left and right screen halves to structure the typography, the use
of unjustified serif type and the overall busyness of the frame—filled with
text, image, and action animated through camera movement—seem
uncharacteristic of Bass’s other work. That is, unless one looks at the
trailer.
The original trailer for The Pride and the Passion is credited onscreen
as follows: “THE TRAILER: DRAWINGS BY DAVID FREDENTHAL
DESIGN BY SAUL BASS.”145 This is apparently the only trailer Bass ever
signed, although visual material from his titles was reused in numerous
trailers, especially for films by Preminger. Bass also claimed responsibility
for the trailer for The Man with the Golden Arm, which intercuts the titles
with shots from the film, but it is unsigned.146 Most strikingly, the trailer
for Stanley Kramer’s film employs neither material from the Bass titles nor
live-action scenes from the film; instead, it presents a synopsis of the film,
wholly illustrated with pencil drawings by David Fredenthal in the style of
Goya. The three-minute trailer opens with a slow zoom onto a drawing of
a Spanish village nestled in a wide-open countryside, while Bizet’s Carmen overture plays and a narrator begins the story of peasants in revolt.
As the film dissolves to a guitar player (the tint transitioning from yellow
to red), yellow bullet holes flash across the screen to the sound of castanets, a dead giveaway that Bass is the author. The bullet holes and red tint
continue to appear as the camera pans along a line of solders and the narrator intones, “The shadow of Napoleon sweeps across a once happy
land.” The trailer then zooms in on the disembodied, gnarled hand of a
corpse (another trademark Bass image), before cutting to drawn portraits
of Cary Grant and the principal actors in costume, the tints dissolving

118

Film Titles
from red to blue and purple to red. In the next section, the camera pans
along a column of peasants dragging the monster cannon, with yellow
diagonal bars punctuating the image, much as they do in the title sequence.
Yellow bars are also used in conjunction with music to signify explosions,
as the French open fire. Finally, as the title appears at the end over a redtinted drawing of the cannon’s giant wheel, yellow lightning streaks from
the gun—another visual punctuation seen in the titles. Utilizing standard
cinematic techniques, such as crosscutting between long shots and closeups, moving the camera, and tinting, Bass animates the two-dimensional
drawings to visualize the story and characters of The Pride and the Passion
and create a three-dimensional narrative space. The sound track, certainly
not written by Bass, establishes the film as a standard Hollywood epic of
oppressed people yearning for liberty. Nevertheless, this is possibly the
most nonconformist trailer produced in Hollywood at the time, and it is
a strong indication of Bass’s growing ability not only to design twodimensional flat spaces but also to construct narratives though editing.

Cartoons: Around the World in 80 Days;
It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World
Although some of the titles discussed above required relatively simple
forms of cell animation, Bass collaborated with animators on more complex projects, such as the mini-cartoon he created for Michael Todd’s
Around the World in 80 Days. Bass humorously reframes the whole threehour epic narrative as an animated epilogue in which the principal characters appear allegorized as cartoon figures. Once his steady collaboration
with Art Goodman began in the mid-1950s, Bass’s films and titles would
regularly feature animated sequences, but for this film he worked with
Disney animator Shamus Culhane and with Bob Curtis, Barry Geller, and
Ron Maidenberg (all of whom were uncredited). The extreme length of
the credits (given the large number of cameos) forced the filmmakers to
put them at the end of the film as an epilogue, which was highly unusual
at the time and a real gamble. As Bass wrote in 1960 about the genesis of
the sequence: “The epilogue represented unusual problems of integration
between the story line and character designation. There was a great need
for a lively and relatively brief statement to counteract the surfeit of desire
to look at additional film after completing several hours of viewing.”147
Bass noted his nervousness when the film opened: “My credits came at

119

SAUL BASS
the end of the movie. When the story was over, people began getting up
to leave. I wanted to shout: ‘Hey, wait! Back, everybody! Sit down!’ Then,
slowly, they did stop and sure enough, sat down again to watch. It was the
crucial test for me.”148 Ironically, it would not be Bass’s central character
(and symbol) in the titles, a running timepiece with legs, but rather his
balloon from the Paris-to-Spain sequence (an invention not found in
Verne’s novel) that would become the central motif for Todd’s conventional advertising campaign.
Michael Todd was an extremely successful Broadway producer who
never did anything that wasn’t gargantuan, and so it was with Around the
World in 80 Days, his first film production. Supposedly involving 68,894
individuals in thirteen different countries, the film consumed 680,000
feet of color film and was shot on 140 sets and 112 natural settings at a
then staggering cost of $6 million.149 Among its cast of tens of thousands
were four leading roles, ninety-eight uncredited feature players, and fortytwo stars in what were termed “cameos,” a word that has since entered
the entertainment industry lexicon.150 Given that all the genuine stars had
to be named in the title sequence, Todd decided to put it at the end of the
film as an epilogue—he already had a prologue with Edward R. Murrow—and to have it animated. Unfortunately, by the time the film was in
postproduction, Todd was so far in debt that his creditors demanded that
the film’s negative be kept in escrow. Bass’s weekly payments abruptly
ceased and did not resume for several months.151 Finances may or may not
have played a role in Bass’s decision in July 1956, roughly four months
before the film’s opening, to obtain a release from his contract to design
the advertising and promotional materials along with the titles; it is possible that he was simply overwhelmed by the production of the
epilogue.152
The credit sequence reportedly cost $60,000, not including Bass’s
fee—an enormous sum at the time and the price of an entire low-budget
feature film.153 The gamble paid off, however, not only in terms of the
film’s numerous Academy Awards and $33 million in box-office receipts
but also in terms of the favorable reviews Bass received for his work. As
Jack Harrison wrote in the Hollywood Reporter: “And Saul Bass rates a
special credit for his epilogue design, which carries all the film’s credits in
an interesting manner that will also entertain audiences through the use
of color, cartoons, fireworks and caricatures.”154 Then again, there were
critics who thought the film was already too long and boring and that

120

Film Titles
Bass’s “amusing animated titles add[ed] an extra five or six minutes.”155
However, as Hollis Alpert noted a few years later, Bass received plenty of
applause for his work: “For the first time in movie history, the audience
gladly sat through titles.”156 Although negative reviews seemed to hold
sway for several decades after its initial release, renewed interest in early cinema travelogues, Hale’s Tours films, and nineteenth-century panoramas
has led some recent Internet commentators to rehabilitate the film because
its 70mm, wide-screen traveling shots mimic early cinematic forms.157
Shortly after the film opened, Animation Inc. filed a lawsuit against
Michael Todd and Saul Bass, claiming that Bass had been “falsely credited” with authorship of the epilogue. Earl Klein, the president of Animation, maintained that the company had created 100 storyboards that had
been given to and plagiarized by Todd without due credit or payment.158
Bass countersued for libel and for $600,000, and the case was settled out
of court shortly before going to trial.159 According to reports, “Undisclosed cash settlement was made, with Animation’s acknowledgement
that Bass was the proper one to get screen credit.”160 In Hollywood,
screen credit is often bestowed on the last talent to work on a project, not
necessarily on everyone who did so. Given the cash settlement, it is likely
that Bass inherited some of the visual material for the project.
The title sequence features a limited animation style with cutout static
figures moving in stop-motion through space—a style popularized by
United Productions of America (UPA). The cell animated figures involved
in the chase move horizontally in endless repetition through broad swaths
of color overlaid with cutout images. What strikes the eye are the constantly changing spatial geographies created out of walls of color, humorously demarcating various segments of the narrative. Each sequence,
representing another leg of the journey, has its own color scheme but also
mimics certain film genres, such as the jungle adventure, the western, or
the Dickensian melodrama. There is a surrealistic quality to much of the
imagery, a lot of it seemingly copied from newspaper illustrations. Some
images are employed to illustrate narrative relationships, while others are
strongly reminiscent of the photo art montages of Moholy-Nagy, such as
Leda (1926). This surrealist view is particularly pronounced in the ocean
sequence, where underwater objects are signified as illustrations because
their size relations are not of the real world. Indeed, like the walls of color,
these animations emphasize two-dimensional space, thereby calling attention to their own artifice.

121

SAUL BASS
The title sequence begins abstractly with a meandering red line, made
by a yellow penny-farthing bicycle, moving across, up, and down the left
side of the screen. When the bicycle’s giant front wheel reaches the exact
middle of the screen, just below the horizontal axis, a play on words in
white typography fades in under the line’s arch—“WHO WAS SEEN IN
WHAT SCENE . . . ,” followed by “ . . . AND WHO DID WHAT”—as
the bicycle continues its circuitous path out of the frame at screen right.
The division of the wide screen into two halves and the use of the circle as
a design element reappear at the film’s end, where two circles depict an
open pocket watch at the bottom center of the frame, dividing the Todd–
AO 70mm wide screen into exactly two halves. While the left circle encloses
the elaborately cursive title of Jules Verne’s novel, as if it were an engraved
inscription on a gold watch, the right circle reveals the timepiece’s moving
gears. Metaphorically, we can interpret the two joined circles as the fulfillment of the film’s heterosexual union, a notion confirmed by Bass’s figures
representing the would-be lovers colliding, inaugurating the scene just
described. The coda symbolically reaffirms the union: the exposed watch
works explode, revealing a beating heart in the remaining circle.
Like the film narrative itself, the six-minute animation behind the
titles is conceived of as a race in which a top-hatted timepiece with legs,
representing Phileas Fogg (David Niven), and a penny-farthing bicycle,
representing Fogg’s manservant Passepartout (Cantinflas), are seen
relentlessly moving from left to right across the screen, conforming to the
journey from London to Asia to America and back to London (i.e., from
west to east). Having already viewed a nearly three-hour epic, audiences
immediately recognized these symbols, since Fogg is depicted as an unbelievably pedantic time-control freak, and Passepartout is introduced riding a penny-farthing, which in the nineteenth century was the exclusive
domain of brash young men. The yellow bicycle passes through a bright
red screen and then continues through an abstract landscape of swaths of
vertical color. These become wider in the abstract gentlemen’s club
sequence, where a row of open-faced cards are constantly morphing into
other cards. Each of the following sequences, visualizing a different geographic locale, is introduced with musical cues from that region’s folk culture. Bass utilizes re-creations of nineteenth-century newspaper
illustrations but adds humorous bits throughout, such as Peter Lorre’s
Japanese servant chasing a butterfly or the angel of Jules Verne dropping
the novel on a bobby’s head.

122

Film Titles
Cantinflas is the first credit to appear onscreen (left), after the bicycle
rides out of the frame screen right. Niven’s credit and symbol are seen
only after a playing card sequence, representing the members of the gentlemen’s club (Finlay Currie, Robert Morley, Ronald Squire). In the following sequences, the names of actors are only loosely associated with the
animation, and their order is not necessarily tied to their importance. For
example, in the balloon sequence, Martine Carol, Fernandel, Charles
Boyer, and Evelyn Keyes are listed, but only Boyer is actually a balloonist;
the others merely appear in the Paris locations. Likewise, José Greco, Luis
Dominguin, Gilbert Roland, and Cesar Romero have cameos in the Spanish locations but not necessarily in the bullfighting sequence depicted.
Alan Mowbry and Robert Newton, the latter playing the detective who
pursues Fogg across the globe, are introduced with an Egyptian pyramid,
and Cedric Hardwicke, Reginald Denny, Ronald Colman, and Robert
Cabal are shown with Indian elephants in the next leg of the journey.
However, Melville Cooper’s credit also appears in the elephant sequence,
even though his cameo as a ship’s steward on the RMS Mongolia occurs
before Fogg and Passepartout reach Cairo. The film’s last major character,
Shirley MacLaine as Indian princess Aouda, rescued from a funeral pyre,
gets her own screen and is represented abstractly by a riot of floating veils
in various shades of blue, with green eyes and a vermilion Tilaka mark on
the implied forehead. Her symbol then joins the bicycle and the timepiece
in the subsequent chase around the world, as does the mustache belonging to the detective who is on the hero’s tail.
That the typography is actually integrated into the animated action,
rather than over it, is another innovation. Credits appear on balloons, out
of fireworks in the election day sequence, or when a saloon door is opened
and closed, as in the San Francisco Barbary Coast sequence.161 Other cameos are credited in a similar fashion as the animated narrative moves from
India to Japan to the United States and then to London. Bass breaks with
Hollywood convention by interspersing the behind-the-scenes credits
with the stars’ cameo credits, rather than grouping the former after the
latter. Thus, the first set of technical credits fades in sequentially on a dark
background while a wooden Siamese longboat in flaming red and yellow
floats through the bottom of the frame. The next set of credits for music,
screenplay, and other technical personnel is superimposed over the San
Francisco political campaign rally and subsequent train journey across the
American plains, while the final set of technical credits (including “Titles

123

SAUL BASS
by Saul Bass”) and those for producer, director, and novelist are inserted
in the London Salvation Army and jail sequences. The jail sequence benefits from a similar bars and turnkey design created by Bass for the promotional material for Stanley Kramer’s My Six Convicts (1952).162 The film’s
head title also appears, against convention, at the very end.
Despite the relentless movement of the cartoon action from left to
right, signifying the chase against time (with time depicted as a fluttering butterfly), Bass’s credits conform to a grid with horizontal and vertical central axes. Interestingly, Bass uses the 70mm screen to his
advantage, emphasizing the extreme width through continuous lateral
movement. He eschews left and right justification (his usual practice)
because that would have created a visual “wall” blocking movement. As
a result, nearly all the credits are placed in reference to the horizontal
axis, thereby visually complementing the eastward flow of the action.
The exceptions are several credits where the designations and the names
form two- and three-pronged forks, the typography mimicking the fireworks in the sky while the ballyhoo of the political campaign is depicted
(and heard) at the bottom of the frame. More in keeping with the Bass
brand, the final credits for Michael Todd, Michael Anderson, and Jules
Verne appear as a split screen in pastel colors, with the vertical axis functioning as a door that is opened by a nineteenth-century London bobby
who inserts a key into a lock, mirroring Phileas Fogg’s own “gaol”
release. Verne’s credit is accompanied by a faded outline of an angel
hovering above the central horizontal axis on the vertical axis, paying
visual tribute to the novel’s author. Bass remains faithful to his emerging
brand by utilizing a white serif type to undergird the historical subject
matter and by presenting all credited names in capital letters and all designations in lowercase type.
Bass’s animated visualizations are both narrative and nonnarrative,
referencing art and art illustrations, flattening space to emphasize the conscious construction of images. In keeping with the notion of self-conscious imagery, Passepartout can be translated from German or French to
mean “mat,” as in a border surrounding a work of art, so here, Bass
frames each vignette as a cliché of the nineteenth-century European vision
of the world—the Sphinx in Egypt, the elephant caravan in India—while
simultaneously engaging in a play of symbols in an imaginary space.163
Finally, Bass inserts the red heart into the pocket watch as a coda or visual
exclamation at the end of the sequence, proclaiming the Hollywood

124

Film Titles
“happy ending.” Here, then, Bass delves into narrative more concretely
than in almost all his other work, since the titles’ intelligibility depends on
a constant reference to the previous narrative.
Like Around the World in 80 Days, the credit sequence for Stanley
Kramer’s It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963) had to accommodate
a huge list of supporting actors and cameos attached to an extremely long
film (190 minutes) presented in Cinerama.164 In both cases, Bass chose to
create an animated cartoon, but for the latter film, he shortened the titles
to just over four minutes and placed them at the beginning of the film.
Given that It’s a . . . Mad World is an essentially plotless slapstick comedy
about a random group of motorists searching for a buried cache of stolen
money, Bass decided to go with a single joke idea rather than retell the
narrative, as he had done in the earlier film. His idea was to take a drawing
of a globe (the mad world of the title) and transform it into various
objects. As Bass described it: “The title is a series of visual puns on a symbol of the world. The symbol becomes, in turn, a ping pong ball, a balloon, a top, a yo-yo, an egg. . . . It is bounced, kicked, inflated, tossed,
hatched . . . and it is zipped open, cracked, sawed, flapped, unhinged.”165
Each visual joke is accompanied by another set of credits. As noted earlier,
Bass had used the same idea in a series of billboards for the Detroit News.166
In one, an arm reaches out from inside the globe; in another, a male figure
looks down into a globe that has been sliced in half. Both ideas are reutilized in the film’s titles.
For It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World, ten actors appear “above the
title,” beginning with Spencer Tracy; thirty-eight more appear below the
title, ending with Jimmy Durante “& a few more surprises.” Once source
actually lists a total of seventy-one actors, including fifty-two cameos.167
The film presented special problems because it was shot on Ultra Panavision 65mm negative, and no one had ever created an animated film in that
wide-screen format. Given that the film was set to premiere at the newly
opened Pacific Cinerama Dome Theatre on Sunset Boulevard in Los
Angeles, the animators faced a number of challenges, including creating
more than 5,000 animated cells that had to be redrawn to fit an extremely
wide screen with an aspect ratio of 2.76:1 (70mm projection prints).168
Bass worked with veteran animator Bill Melendez of Playhouse Pictures
(who would later become famous for the Peanuts and Charlie Brown
films).
The drawings were simple black ink on clear acetate, which Bass

125

SAUL BASS
placed against various colored backgrounds—mostly red, but also orange,
purple, and pink.169 Bass gets his own credit for title design, but Melendez
and his team of animators seemingly remain uncredited, unless the credit
sequence is frozen at the moment the globe (which is being inflated with
a bicycle pump) explodes to reveal names like so much confetti: Bill
Melendez, Ed Levitt, Bernard Gruver, Bob Carlson, Carl Pederson, and
Ade Woolery. Surprisingly, Bass was not credited in the film’s press
book,170 so he received few mentions in reviews. An exception was Philip
K. Scheuer, who wrote in the Los Angeles Times that “Saul Bass’ opening
titles are inspired, but then they are cartoons,” making the point that the
human characters lack depth.171 Daily Variety ended its review with the
following statement: “Titles by Saul Bass are clever and dizzying, aptly
igniting the fuse for an explosive motion picture experience.”172 By August
1965, It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World had grossed more than $30 million in road shows and regular theatrical runs, yet United Artists’ estimated net profit was only $610,200.173
The title sequence begins with the opening credit—“STANLEY
KRAMER PRESENTS A UNITED ARTISTS RELEASE”—centered
and center-justified in white sans serif capital letters. This title had to
remain on the screen for twenty-two seconds while the oversized Cinerama curtain rose.174 Next, a male figure wearing a black hat and carrying
a huge globe with extreme difficulty enters from frame left, moves to the
center of the image, then disappears underneath the weight of the orb.
The figure is almost identical to the character of the canvasser measuring
responses to advertising in Bass’s Apples and Oranges (1962) or in a series
of trade advertisements for Some Like It Hot (1960). A hand then saws a
square hole from inside the globe and waves a flag with Spencer Tracy’s
name on it. Two disembodied hands appear from the top of the screen
and nail the hole shut, setting up the basic cartoon situation: the “hands
of God” are manipulating the globe, and the humans inside the globe are
trying to get out. Subsequent credits for starring roles appear when the
hands from on high produce a key for opening a can of Spam and proceed
to open the globe similarly, while smaller hands inside the globe throw
out names that appear in a column at screen left. When the inside hands
start manically rearranging the names’ order, the hands of God close up
the globe and bounce the credits offscreen. The globe then splits in two
horizontally and fireworks explode outward, revealing the film’s title in
yellow dots resembling Broadway lights, another recurring Bass visual

126

Film Titles
trope. The hand from above manages to cap the gusher and screw the top
of the globe back into place, leading to the next joke: As the globe withers
in size to form an egg, a giant hen sits on it. The egg cracks open to reveal
more actors’ credits; then the two halves morph into a shell game to
expose additional credits. The globe then changes into a tire for a unicycle, with two legs from above peddling through the frame, leaving a row
of white lettering in its wake, and then back again. Just as it is about to
leave the frame, the tire springs a leak and deflates. The hands from above
pump it up until it completely fills the frame and explodes, showering
names over the whole frame until only a handful of actors’ credits remain,
which are picked up by a hand from inside the globe.
For the subsequent technical credits, the globe is wound up with
another key and begins spinning like a top. While a male figure holds on
to the top for dear life, a crowd of figures is catapulted in all directions like
the spinning disk ride at Coney Island, which Bass might have remembered from childhood. Once the globe stops spinning, a number of black
bodies lift off the top of the globe and walk off screen left, revealing more
technical credits, including “Titles by Saul Bass.” For the music credits, a
small figure appears from inside the globe and begins to sing the title song
but is immediately silenced when the hand of God slaps the door shut.
Those same hands then cut up the globe to create a row of paper dolls,
with one doll consisting of typography. The hand next turns the globe
into a yo-yo to reveal major credits. Then a small figure uses a ladder to
open another door in the globe, from which a mob merges and tramples
the figure underfoot as Stanley Kramer’s final credit for producing and
directing rolls.
Like the film itself, which starred virtually every comedian working in
Hollywood at the time, Bass’s title sequence is pure slapstick—a series of
sight gags that have no direct connection to the film’s plot but prepare the
audience for the madcap car chase to follow. Similarly, the film implies that
it is every man (and woman) for himself (and herself) in the race for the
money, and the invisible hand of fate will intervene to help or hinder the
participants in a chase to end all chases. The disembodied hands that keep
entering from various sides of the frame to manipulate the globe may be
read as Bass’s version of the “fickle finger of fate,” influencing the everchanging amalgamations of antagonists pursuing the money. Here, then,
Bass reveals his genuine sense of humor, which first made an appearance
in the Sale of Manhattan sequence Bass created with Stan Freberg, as well

127

SAUL BASS
as in Some Like It Hot; it is featured more prominently in the credit
sequence for Not with My Wife, You Don’t (1966), the civilization sequence
in Why Man Creates (1968), and Notes on the Popular Arts (1977).
To delve deeper into the Bass style and brand as they pertain to his
title sequences, it might be productive to return to Bass’s poster and
advertising work for the major Hollywood studios, in particular, his insistence on utilizing modern forms of product advertising to promote new
films to the public and to the entertainment industry. In traditional film
advertising as Bass had practiced it from the late 1930s through the mid1940s, the goal was to reach as much of the film-going public as possible
by filling an ad with multiple messages. Bass subsequently gravitated
toward creating a single visual or graphic identity for a film that, if successful, could “sell” the film much more efficiently than the previous scattershot approach.

128

3

Creating a Mood
Pars pro toto
Bauhaus and Gestalt aesthetics influenced Saul Bass’s art, nowhere more
visibly than in his film posters, which often reduced a film’s narrative content to a single iconic image. The designer’s later reputation as a creator
of pithy corporate logos provides a clue to his method: Bass had an
extreme talent for capturing the essence of a film’s narrative in a single
abstract, highly iconographic image; this image, through its metonymic
quality, would then become the central visual idea or logo for an advertising campaign. Most historians credit Bass as being the inventor of the film
logo, which “is the figurative representation of a film’s meaning, its title,
its plot.”1 Bass was always looking for metonymies—the parts standing in
metaphorically for the whole, pars pro toto—as prescribed by Gestalt theory. Furthermore, by the mid-1950s, Bass had designed a number of
logos for corporate clients, including Lightcraft, Frank Holmes Laboratories, and KLH Research, so he was well acquainted with the trademark
principle. Bass was in fact at the forefront of a new trend toward corporate
identity campaigns.2 For his film advertising campaigns, Bass designed
what he called “visual slogans” that identified a film for the potential audience with a single image.3
Interestingly, we find Bass’s most extensive theoretical statements on
what constitutes a good logo design not in an interview or an essay but in
his AT&T corporate identity campaign film (1969). There, Saul Bass
notes that many clean, new products feature modernist designs. The goal
of any logo is to “break through and help unclutter the visual environment.” A trademark is central to any advertising campaign, and Bass identifies three types of trademarks: abbreviations; words; and word and

129

SAUL BASS
image, called logo type. In the last case, an image identifies the company,
while the words underneath may indicate subsidiaries. According to Bass,
a logo must be contemporary, and simple forms can remain contemporary
over a long time—for instance, the Mercedes-Benz star was designed
eighty-five years ago. Finally, logo, typeface, and a specific and constant
color scheme can combine to create multiplying signifiers, as in the case
of the AT&T stripes with the bell logo—the stripes signifying competition
and speed in contemporary usage.4 How to stand out in a crowd was the
question. Bass’s answer was to leave space around his logos, invariably
placing them in monochromatic fields of color that framed them and
allowed them to breathe, away from the visual clutter of other
advertising.
Such identity-based advertising campaigns in the film industry became
possible once the Hollywood studio system began to break down in the
early 1950s. This allowed independent producer-directors such as Otto
Preminger to take control of their films’ publicity, rather than turning the
marketing over to anonymous studio advertising departments or, worse,
local theater chain owners. One critic pinned the advent of the movie logo
on “an era of cost-cutting on the part of the studios and other moviemakers,” since logos could be utilized in smaller, cheaper advertisements, and
stated that Bass was the “acknowledged master of the art form.”5 After
experiencing major difficulties with the Motion Picture Producers and
Distributors Association (MPPDA) and United Artists over the campaign
for The Moon Is Blue (1953), Preminger decided he needed to stay
involved with his film’s advertising. Joseph Breen, head of the Motion
Picture Production Code Office, had denied the film its seal of approval
for allegedly being pornographic, and United Artists’ advertising campaign treated the film as if it actually were pornographic, featuring a naked
woman looking at the moon.6 Livid that his gentle sex comedy would be
sold as an exploitation film, Preminger claimed he hired Bass to create a
more subtle approach (although there is some question about this). Bass
supposedly drew two doves on a windowsill with the shade drawn, an idea
he would also use in his poster for Billy Wilder’s Love in the Afternoon
(1957) and the titles for Ocean’s Eleven (1960), but the design was not
widely implemented for The Moon Is Blue.7 In the advertising campaign
for Carmen Jones, Bass created a logo that was used in the title sequence,
but it was not carried through consistently in the advertising. For The
Man with the Golden Arm, Preminger insisted that the campaign maintain

130

Creating a Mood
a consistent look and message, creating a revolution in the industry that
was not welcomed on all fronts.
For his first logo-only campaign, Bass envisioned a contorted arm for
The Man with the Golden Arm. The publicity effort began in December
1955 with a 540-foot billboard mounted above the Fox Beverly in Los
Angeles.8 Next, the city was plastered with 164 billboards (twenty-four
sheets) and 6,000 six-sheet posters.9 The crooked arm symbol also
appeared on movie theater marquees without any additional title information, including at the Victoria Theatre on Broadway, where the film premiered—a first in the industry. Since the symbol had been so widely
disseminated by the time of the film’s opening, the gimmick worked.10
However, some advertisers had grave doubts because neither of the film’s
stars, Frank Sinatra and Kim Novak, was named or seen anywhere in the
images. Indeed, when some theater owners threatened to add photographs of Sinatra, Preminger told them he would pull the film.11 The onesheet poster eventually included small images of the principal actors. In
the end, the campaign for The Man with the Golden Arm was a huge success, despite intense pressure from United Artists to make it more conventional. In fact, the distributor relented only because the filming of the
controversial novel had caused a firestorm in the press, and the movie was
still in production just weeks before its 16 December 1955 opening.12 On
27 December the Hollywood Reporter published a seven-page advertisement for the film, opening with the poster and followed by full-page photos of Frank Sinatra, Eleanor Parker, Richard Conte, and Kim Novak,
while Lewis Meltzer and Elmer Bernstein got tribute pages. Strangely,
there was no page for Preminger.13
The Bass-Preminger logo campaign was repeated for other films,
including Anatomy of a Murder (1959). Variety columnist Robert Landry
noted that Bass’s logo for the campaign had been designed even before
Preminger shot the film on location in Michigan. The logo, a highly
abstracted image of what was assumed to be a corpse— “known in the
trade already as ‘the horizontal man’”—was “stuck all over the American
scenery.” The campaign premiered in Los Angeles with billboards of just
the logo; these were then posted over with the stars and the logo, and
finally with the logo and full billing. The logo was also printed on more
than 100,000 postcards to advertise the paperback reissue of Robert Traver’s novel, on which the film is based.14 Much of the original trailer either
intercuts the titles or superimposes the credits over live-action scenes from

131

SAUL BASS
the film; it may have been produced by Bass, although he receives no
credit.15
Indeed, the visual logos created by Bass for particular movie advertising campaigns are unforgettable. The rose in flames for Carmen Jones
(1954) illustrates the central character’s temperament and beauty. The
fractured arm for The Man with the Golden Arm (1955) symbolizes the
principal character’s use of intravenous drugs. The chain-mail leggings
and broken sword of a medieval knight for Saint Joan (1957) represent
Joan’s status as a French warrior arrested by the English invaders. The face
and teardrops in Bonjour Tristesse (1957) metaphorically illustrate the
emotional state of the film’s teenage heroine. The swirling vortex design
for Vertigo (1958) visualizes the central character’s fear of heights. The
Van Gogh–esque desert sun in The Big Country (1958) dwarfs a tiny
posse on the horizon, emphasizing the film’s vast geographic space. The
disembodied corpse (post autopsy) for Anatomy of a Murder (1959)
becomes a metonymy for the defense attorney’s legal analysis at a murder
trial. The arm holding up a sword in Spartacus (1960) and a rifle in Exodus (1960) represents two well-known uprisings, Roman slaves and the
Haganah. The disembodied woman carrying three balloons in One, Two,
Three (1961) symbolizes the many surprises experienced by an American
Coca-Cola executive in Cold War Berlin. The logo-image of West Side
Story visualizes an urban tenement with attached fire escape and exuberant dancers. The exposed dome of the U.S. Capitol implies that Advise
and Consent (1962) is an inside look into the workings of Congress.16 The
stopwatch in Nine Hours to Rama (1963) collapses the narrative’s frantic
search for a would-be assassin into a race against the clock. The cash-carrying balloon in It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963) embodies the
film’s madcap race to find the hidden prize money. For The Cardinal
(1963), Bass employed only typography: the letters “Cardinal” overshadowed by “The,” signifying the overwhelming power of the Vatican.17 The
extended arm of an admiral for In Harm’s Way (1965) encapsulates the
military’s power to send men to their deaths in war. The cutout doll for
Bunny Lake Is Missing (1965) represents the mother’s search for her lost
child. The folded legs of a reclining female nude in Such Good Friends
(1971) refer to the many lovers of a dying man (as discovered by his wife).
With Rosebud (1975), Bass reprises the armed extremity from Exodus, this
time carrying a knife, a grenade, a gun, and a corkscrew—the weapons
belonging to the Palestinian terrorists who kidnap five wealthy young

132

Creating a Mood
women. For Brothers (1977), a film about an Angela Davis–type character
who is in love with an imprisoned Black Panther, Bass imagines two holding hands, one in shackles. For Preminger’s last film, The Human Factor
(1979), Bass employs a telephone receiver with a long cord hanging down
off the hook to represent a secret agent’s mysterious disappearance in the
first scene, setting the convoluted spy plot in motion. And finally, in the
poster (drawn by Art Goodman) for The Double McGuffin (1979), a
group carries away a bound corpse on their shoulders, referencing the disappearance of a body found by a group of boys in the woods.
These logos achieved instant recognition by simplifying their semantic content to basic geometric forms, eliminating all details to become
two-dimensional silhouettes that could be printed in any monochromatic
color. The logos functioned as a central design element in the posters, but
they were also utilized in all other publicity materials, creating a moment
of instant visual perception before the brain had a chance to decipher the
verbal text. Taking his cues from Gestalt notions of reductiveness, Bass’s
ambition was to distill everything “down to one image that was both provocative and metaphorical, and yet somewhat ambiguous and seductive,
and still true to the film.”18 No other contemporary designer made such
heavy use of these logo-like images that spoke to “the language of the
eye.” Furthermore, while most movie publicity designers still relied on
photographic images to denote the film’s content, Bass’s logos were much
more abstract and thus more effective in creating a recognition effect in
the consumer. With the campaigns for Warner Brothers’ Batman (1989)
and Steven Spielberg’s Jurassic Park (1993), modern movie publicity
caught up with this concept.
We can even find Bass logos on posters he did not take credit for. For
example, at first glance, the window cards and other advertising for the
American release of Spartacus demonstrate what Bass would not have
done: there are far too many characters in the design, although the notion
of putting a character’s likeness on Roman coins may have come from
Bass. But the coins themselves are too realistic, as are the photographically
reproduced faces. Also, there is no balance or dynamic in the composition: the coins are ordered taxonomically, rather than in a visually arresting fashion. However, the typography of the title Spartacus and the figure
that marks its visual end point in the lower right-hand corner are clues to
Bass’s input: the Roman torso in silhouette with the outstretched arm and
sword mirrors the outstretched arm with a rifle in Exodus’s design and is

133

SAUL BASS
inverted on The Man with the Golden Arm’s publicity. In fact, Universal
Studios handled all the designs for Spartacus without Bass’s participation,
except for that logo.19 Ironically, the logo does not appear in the Bassdesigned credit sequence for Spartacus, although he had previously
included logos in his title sequences for The Man with the Golden Arm,
Bonjour Tristesse, and other films. It should also be noted that Bass did not
design logos for many of the films he worked on as a title designer; nor
did he employ such logos in his own films.
The utilization of logos implied an extremely focused advertising
campaign, which contradicted standard studio and entertainment industry practice. Traditional studio ballyhooers employed a scattershot
approach, attempting to reach as many potential audiences as possible
with mixed messages (and images), including the names and head shots of
the stars and some emblematic scenes from the film. Bass, in contrast,
employed the trademark principle, hammering home a single point to the
broadest possible audience, forcing them to actively engage and not just
consume; as readers, they were expected to decode the abstract, seemingly ubiquitous image. This approach had its pitfalls. Such an advertising
campaign could never rescue a box-office failure (such as Saint Joan), but,
Bass observed, it might “help push a mediocre film over the line.”20 It was
a gamble, however: “If it catches on, you’re a hero. If it doesn’t, all’s lost
and you take the entire blame.”21 In fact, Bass did get the blame for the
failed Vertigo advertising campaign, which initially used the spiral logo he
designed. That logo apparently didn’t catch on with the public, so Paramount switched to a conventional sell, utilizing the logo only for the
modified one-sheet posters. Changing an advertising campaign midstream was not uncommon, although the redesigned ads could also be
hits or misses.22 In this case, the new campaign substantially improved
attendance, leading Paramount to reaffirm the right of studio executives
to turn “a deaf ear” to independents with their own campaign angles.23
Nevertheless, Bass continued to make posters with logo-like designs for
Preminger and other clients.

A Short History of Movie Posters
Ervine Metzl states in The Poster: Its History and Its Art that a great poster
exemplifies both good art and good advertising.24 Saul Bass’s movie posters fulfilled the first rule of good poster design by grabbing the attention

134

Creating a Mood
of passersby with their bright colors and logo-like images that were both
recognizable and mysterious, encouraging viewers to look more closely.
Posters had been used to attract audiences since the turn of the twentieth
century, when the film industry was in its infancy. Modern poster printing
technology—namely, the use of stone lithography—had been invented in
1798 by Alois Senefelder in Germany, but it was not until 1866, when
Jules Chéret began creating multicolor stone lithos in Paris, that posters
became a popular medium for legitimate theater advertising.25 In Europe,
artists such as Henri de Toulouse-Lautrec, Alphonse Mucha, Pierre Bonnard, and Aubrey Beardsley soon dominated street scenes with their Art
Nouveau posters. By the beginning of the twentieth century, posters were
an established medium of public communication with its own infrastructure consisting of poster clubs, poster galleries, poster critics, and even
journals such as Das Plakat (Berlin) and The Poster (New York).26
Before 1910, movie posters were generic, advertising a film company’s total output or a particular genre rather than any one film, and individual nickelodeons often produced their own hand-painted posters. With
the establishment of the Motion Picture Patents Trust in 1908 under the
guise of the General Film Company, movie poster production was centralized and subject to strict internal censorship. The General Film Company
hired A. B. See Lithograph Company of Cleveland to print posters and
advertising materials for all its member companies, including Biograph,
Edison, Essanay, Kalem, Kleine, Selig, and Vitagraph;27 however, other
companies, such as the Metro Litho Company of New York, also served
the film industry. The General Film Company’s Poster Department also
standardized poster sizes, some of which already existed for other kinds of
entertainment, especially the one-sheet (27 by 41 inches), three-sheet (41
by 81 inches), six-sheet (81 by 81 inches), and twenty-four-sheet (246 by
108 inches) formats. New formats designed specifically to dress up theater
lobbies included lobby cards (11 by 14 inches), half sheets (22 by 28
inches), and insert cards (14 by 36 inches); in the 1910s, these were
printed in a brown and white rotogravure process, but by the 1920s, a
photo-gelatin or heliotype printing process became the norm.28 Larger
stone lithographic posters remained a rarity until the advent of feature
films around 1915. For example, Universal advertised its Lois Weber production of The Merchant of Venice (1914) with a special six-sheet poster,
illustrating a scene from the film.29 One-sheets were sold by A. B. See to
cinema owners for fifteen cents apiece.30 Early trade articles about

135

SAUL BASS
“paper”—as poster advertising was known in the industry—focused on
the often lurid visual content of posters, which seldom did justice to the
films.31 Some people complained that the actors’ faces on the posters were
too generic (remedied by sending photos of the actors to the lithographer’s artists) or that the scenes were too generic, leading patrons to think
they had already seen the film, even if it had just been released.32
Once the star system established itself in America in the early 1910s,
posters began to name actors more frequently. As early as 1912, film companies began to offer posters of their stars; for example, Crystal Films sold
“the first ever five color poster on an individual performer,” featuring
Pearl White.33 By 1916–1918, posters of individual films and their stars
were commonplace, even in billboard size. One trade journal suggested
that exhibitors use a generic twenty-four-sheet billboard advertising Pauline Frederick at Paramount, then papering over it with a six-sheet poster
in the corner to advertise her latest release.34 Posters featuring the star of
the movie in costume remained standard throughout the 1920s, but a
new offset color printing process introduced at the end of the decade by
the Morgan Litho Company eventually supplanted most stone lithography film poster production.35 The offset process allowed poster designers
to reproduce photographs on posters, significantly changing their look,
although artists’ renditions remained popular until at least the 1970s.
In the 1930s film posters became more varied stylistically in terms of
their content, with each studio developing its own house style. Posters
created in studio shops were usually not the work of a single artist; rather,
they were produced by several illustrators, each of whom had his own specialty (e.g., faces or women or western scenes). Artists at 20th Century–
Fox, working with Tooker Litho, continued to produce stone lithographs
until the 1950s, with busy mixtures of colors, stars, film scenes, and credits. Columbia produced illustrated posters under art director Jack Meyers
until the 1940s; then, to cut costs, it switched to a process of using colorized black-and-white still images for posters. MGM’s advertising department under Hal Burrows preferred a clean and simple look consisting of
portraits of stars, plain white or one-color backgrounds, and red-black or
red-blue typography; it relied heavily on freelance illustrators such as Al
Hirschfeld, Clayton Knight, William Galbraith Crawford, Louis Fancher,
and Alvan Cordell “Hap” Hadley. Paramount posters featured bigger
faces and more color variety, but they were generally less sophisticated
than MGM’s, displaying the artwork of Herman Heyer, Constantin Ala-

136

Creating a Mood
jalov, Peter Arno, Buford Tune, and Frederick Siebel. Under art director
David Strumf, RKO emphasized subtle designs and often employed soft
watercolor washes, but it also produced some colorful and brash posters,
especially those created by Abe Burnbaum, Frank Bensing, Russell Paterson, and William Rose. Universal’s art department was headed by Phillip
Cochrane until 1937 (and by Maurice Kallis after 1942); it turned out
posters with very bold colors and very little white space and employed artists such as Karl Godwin, A. M. Froelich, Frank Snapp, and Harry Fur.
Warner Brothers under Charles Einfeld had the cheapest looking paper
after it switched from multicolor to two-color printing at the end of the
1930s; it often reproduced a montage of photographs rather than original
artwork.36 However, common to almost all studio posters was a traditional style of realistic illustration that harked back to N. C. Wyeth; the
more high art–inflected styles were limited to European film posters. Virtually all movie poster design work remained anonymous, although a few
well-known designers occasionally received contracts, including Alberto
Vargas for Moon over Miami (1941), Thomas Hart Benton for The Grapes
of Wrath (1939), Norman Rockwell for The Magnificent Ambersons
(1942) and The Song of Bernadette (1943), and Paul Rand for No Way
Out (1950). Some well-known designers, such as Milton Glaser and Herb
Lubalin, left the industry in disgust because their designs were rarely used.
The problem was that the advertising campaigns, including posters, were
subject to approval by a studio hierarchy that insisted on making design
decisions.37 Only after obtaining such approval was the artwork sent to
the printers, which, beginning in 1940, forwarded the final product to the
National Screen Service for distribution to exchanges and theaters.
National Screen Service, a producer of movie trailers for the studios,
had been in business since 1920, but in 1940 it made a deal to once again
centralize the distribution of all movie paper.38 At first, some of the studios, such as Paramount, turned over all their paper production to NSS;
however, they soon regained artistic control of their advertising, utilizing
NSS merely to distribute posters to exhibitors.39 National Screen Service’s
greatest innovation was to add a date code and release number in the
lower right-hand corner of every movie poster it distributed (e.g., 65/136
for In Harm’s Way, indicating that this was the 136th film distributed by
NSS in 1965). Not until 1984 did NSS lose its monopoly, and the studios
resumed control over poster distribution.
Meanwhile, styles changed little, with scenes from films and stars’

137

SAUL BASS
names dominating movie poster content. Studios did experiment, however, with different versions of a poster for a given film, with style A being
more prevalent than style B (in rare cases, there was even a style C). Bass
usually designed style A, but in some cases his were designated style B;
for example, for The Big Country, the style A poster is dominated by conventional pencil sketches of the four principal actors. In the 1960s and
1970s illustrations and typography were usually printed on white backgrounds, a style that gave way to full-color photographic images as a
background for text in the post-1980 period. As in the case of titles
sequences, Saul Bass bucked these trends with his poster designs, which
not only eschewed realistic illustrations but also drew their inspiration
from modernist art.

Saul Bass Posters
It’s unclear when Bass designed his first movie poster. He won a New
York Art Directors Club medal for a design for Carmen Jones (the artist
was Al Kallis, Maurice Kallis’s son) that is identical to the film’s one-sheet
poster, which was probably his first.40 The Carmen Jones poster seems
fairly traditional at first glance, with its realistically painted central figure
of the African American Carmen. Indeed, photographs or artwork depicting the stars, so prevalent in the movie posters of the era, are almost completely absent from Bass’s work, except when they were added after the
fact, as in the case of the posters for The Man with the Golden Arm. However, typical for Bass is the Bauhaus box design, where the bars of the bedpost create rectangular frames, similar to his Return to Paradise trade ads
or Panaview Company advertising. The bottom 20 percent of the frame
is stark black, with white and some blue typography; in contrast, the upper
80 percent is flaming orange, with the black bars framing Carmen in hot
pink on the right half of the poster’s frame. Carmen and the bed promise
sex, but they also boil down the visual imagery to a bare minimum to
focus on the film’s theme. The black bedpost allows Bass to abstractly
divide his space, giving the illusion of order or a woman in her place, but
simultaneously emphasizing the garish and conflicting colors that suggest
murder and mayhem. The poster does not include the Bass-designed logo
of the rose and the flame, although the title lobby card for Carmen Jones
is all logo, with a tiny Kallis-painted figure of Dorothy Dandridge in the
lower right-hand corner.

138

Creating a Mood
Saul Bass posters were without precedent in the American film industry. Since at least the 1930s, studio publicity departments had tried to
cram as much information as possible into a poster, overcrowding the
space with both too much typography (and different styles of type) and
too many images. Bass reduced the message to a minimum, presenting
even large amounts of text in such a way as to make it part of the abstract
design of the whole. As one poster historian put it: “Extracting a basic
symbol from his credit sequences, Bass interpreted the nature of film in
simple graphic terms, making his posters instantly recognizable and striking.”41 Another critic called his film posters “the most distinguished
motion picture graphics in the United States.”42
However, according to at least once source, Bass’s style of poster fell
out of fashion in the late 1960s,43 yet he continued to produce occasional
movie posters into the late 1970s. One challenge was that as actors took
increasing control of their own careers in the 1960s and beyond, contracts
often dictated the exact placement of the stars’ images and text on all publicity, precluding Bass-style designs that featured only logos and monochromatic backgrounds.44
Such industry-mandated parameters, or the fact that his original
proofs were changed, may have been why Bass has “disowned” an indeterminate number of his poster designs. For example, the A-style poster
for Carmen Jones was designed by Bass and painted by Al Kallis. Another
example: the A-style poster for Stanley Kramer’s Judgment at Nuremberg
(1961) features a black background with extremely high-contrast, inkdrawn profile portraits of the principals (as if part of a jury) in a thick column along the vertical axis; it is framed at the top by a tagline in yellow
type and at the bottom by the names of the actors, running perpendicular
to the images, with Kramer’s name and the film’s title in yellow at the very
bottom. It is a striking poster, and the title’s placement and size make it
even more unconventional.45 For unknown reasons, Bass never took
credit for either poster, or perhaps he just forgot he had designed them.
However, Bass’s authorship of the latter seems undeniable when compared with a trade advertisement (possibly unpublished) for The Shrike
drawn by Al Kallis. It employs the exact same design concept: an extreme
high-contrast profile portrait in white at the center of a black background.
The portrait group on the Nuremberg one-sheet poster reappears in various other media, including the six-sheet (but not the three-sheet) foreign
poster designs (Denmark, Germany) and the sound-track album cover,

139

SAUL BASS
where the image is utilized as if it were a logo, another indication that Bass
was the designer. Furthermore, the black-and-white color scheme with a
touch of yellow, possibly referring to the yellow armbands Jews were
forced to wear in Nazi Germany, gives the poster a kind of gravitas, in
keeping with the grim subject matter, and again points to Bass. Finally,
the layout of the text, with the actors’ names justified left and right to create a solid block, anchoring the visual image with the title modestly placed
below, is typical of Bass, as evidenced by his subsequent poster for In
Harm’s Way. Conversely, the poster for West Side Story has been credited
to Bass by numerous historians, and a case can be made that it conforms
to the Bass style; however, either Bass disowned it or it was created without his participation as a faux Bass poster.46 How many other Bass posters
remain unidentified?
Bass actually signed numerous film festival and special event posters,
which he continued to produce almost until he died, such as the Academy
Award posters in the 1990s. The great majority of this work for nonprofits was pro bono and was often carried out by subordinates like Art Goodman. Nevertheless, Bass’s classic posters created for Preminger, Hitchcock,
and Wilder in the 1950s and 1960s have rightfully entered into the art
market as prized objects, commanding significantly higher prices than
other poster collectibles.47
Bass experimented with minimalist design concepts in his movie trade
advertisements, but his posters moved beyond good design to poster art.
The goal of a movie poster, according to Bass, is “to evoke a mood, an
atmosphere, and a feeling that is appropriate to the character of the film.
It must symbolize and summarize in the most succinct and memorable
form what the film is essentially about.”48 Thus, Bass’s creations had to
fulfill all the criteria of modernist conceptions of good poster design: “visibility, simplicity of message, originality of forms, singularity of color
scheme and intellectual clarity.”49 Bass’s not quite monochromatic color
choices guaranteed visibility. The logos and content-appropriate typography spoke to simplicity and originality. Finally, the unified approach was
evidence of great intellectual clarity.
Employing logos as trademarks to identify individual films, Bass demonstrated an almost exclusive preference for uniformly red or red-orange
backgrounds for his posters. This not only attracted viewer attention but
also highlighted the usually black logo designs: Carmen Jones; Edge of the
City; The Big Country; Vertigo; West Side Story; Advise and Consent; One,

140

Creating a Mood
Two, Three; Nine Hours to Rama (never used); It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad,
Mad World; The Human Factor; Such Good Friends; Brothers; The Double
McGuffin; The Shining; and the unpublished Tonkô. Apart from the film’s
title, all other typography for stars and credits was placed at the bottom of
the poster, usually in very small, almost invisible print so that attention
was focused on the logo. The logos themselves varied from abstractions
to concrete, iconographic images, but at least eight of them directly referenced high modernist art imagery.
The Big Country’s style B poster features a bright yellow sun in an
orange desert landscape, painted in the style of Van Gogh’s moon in
Starry Night. The sun backlights a line of tiny black riders on the implied
horizon, while the almost translucent typography above (except for the
black title) seems to be nothing more than a desert cloud.50 The poster for
Billy Wilder’s One, Two, Three is cartoonish and roughly drawn by Art
Goodman’s hand, as if it were a twentieth-century modernist interpretation of “primitive art” (both Bass and Goodman had an affinity for preColumbian art). The woman’s face and disembodied arm in stark black
frame the balloons that dominate the center of the image. For Such Good
Friends, the logo-image of a woman’s legs as she lies horizontally seemingly references the rounded female forms of Hans Arp, Henry Moore, or
Henri Matisse’s Blue Nude II (1952); in the last work, the position of the
legs and the angle of view are strikingly similar to Bass’s poster. For the
Why Man Creates poster, Bass places a Giacometti-like human figure in
silhouette against an orange sun in a red landscape, an image that today
has more of a science-fiction than a modern art feel, given its similarity to
later alien images such as ET. The connection to modernist art is even
more apparent in Bass’s most famous posters.
The posters for The Man with the Golden Arm, Saint Joan, Bonjour
Tristesse, and Anatomy of a Murder stand out in American film poster history. Quite apart from the uniqueness of their design (particularly their
trademark semantics), these posters consciously pay homage to modernist, abstract art. Interestingly, although the development of logos has been
discussed ad nauseam by both journalists and serious commentators in the
Bass literature, no one has mentioned that Bass’s posters for these early
Preminger films utilize large areas of color abstractly, mirroring the work
of Abstract Expressionists in the United States and European modernist
painters. Indeed, some of these posters can be cited as examples of color
field painting, since the impression of color is at least as important as the

141

SAUL BASS
logos within them. Color field painters evolved in the 1950s and included
Mark Rothko, Ad Reinhardt, Clifford Still, Adolph Gottlieb, Barnett
Newman, and Robert Motherwell. These American painters privileged
large areas of uniform color on their abstract canvases, downplaying the
role of brushstrokes and the action of painting in favor of pure color as a
subject on a flat surface.
To take the most obvious example, Saul Bass’s poster for Anatomy of
a Murder is an almost exact reimaging of Mark Rothko’s painting Orange
and Yellow (1956). Both images feature a large rectangular field of yelloworange color over a rectangle of orange-red. The hues may not be exactly
the same, but both painting and poster have slightly irregular rectangles;
Rothko’s borders are indistinct, while Bass’s have a hand-drawn look with
broken lines. The original Rothko has a slightly larger field of color as a
base, covering approximately 60 percent of the frame, whereas Bass
reverses the scheme: his yellow field (with the corpse logo) is a bit topheavy, giving the composition an imbalance, in keeping with the film’s
theme. According to Rothko, his abstract paintings and colors “express
. . . basic human emotions—tragedy, ecstasy, doom. . . . The people who
weep before my pictures are having the same religious experience I had
when I painted them.”51 One can imagine that Bass wanted to communicate similar emotions abstractly, especially rage and jealousy, which are
important motivations in the murder trial that is the subject of the film.
Utilizing large swaths of color, whether all red or other strong colors, certainly attracted visual attention, whether on a billboard or a one-sheet
poster. But associating Preminger’s film with the modern art of Rothko
and Abstract Expressionism gave it added cachet as both a serious and an
extremely contemporary work. Duke Ellington used Bass’s poster in the
background of his 1962 television special in The Art of Ellington! Host
Raymond Burr compared Ellington’s jazz to the modern art of Picasso,
Cezanne, and Gauguin.52 The black logo itself—the “horizontal man,” as
the industry trades dubbed it—was constructed of disconnected body
parts lying in an orange field; this referenced not only the wooden models
used by art students to learn how to draw proper proportions but also
modern art methods of depicting the body, as evidenced by the abovementioned Blue Nude II.
Likewise, Bass’s poster design for Saint Joan places the film’s logo at
the center of an abstract painting consisting of small squares in various
shades of red, yellow, blue-gray, and off-white on a red background. Like

142

Creating a Mood
the central logo of a knight’s leggings and broken sword, the squares have
an unfinished look, as if they were created by a single imperfect brushstroke or were badly printed. The logo seems to represent Joan herself: a
military leader broken by the enemy, like her sword, which lies at the figure’s feet. In contrast, Bass’s use of arrows on the ends of the S and J of
the title’s white typography is less readable, resembling devils’ tails more
than the directional signs he would later use for West Side Story or his
Alcoa campaign. Was Bass expressing the irony of a saint being accused of
consorting with the devil? The forest of squares can be read literally as a
brick wall or as an abstract representation of Joan’s ragtag army. Bass himself likened the squares of color in a red field to a “medieval stained-glass
effect” as background for the historical film.53 However, the overall
impression of a mosaic of reds and blues on a flat red field seems to reference Ad Reinhardt’s painting Red (1950) as well as an otherwise uncharacteristic Piet Mondrian painting, Composition Chequerboard Dark
Colours (1919), consisting of red and blue squares. Again, the logo’s
placement over an abstract field of color has strong associations with
modernist art, especially Abstract Expressionism, which was in vogue at
the time; this would have spoken to the kind of educated audience that
might be interested in a historical film about a thirteenth-century Catholic martyr. Indeed, the logo’s sensibility, reminiscent of carbon rubbings off a medieval tomb, is consciously juxtaposed with the
background’s modernity, a paradox Preminger’s movie promised but
seldom delivered.
Bass’s poster for The Man with the Golden Arm is a product of his first
total identity campaign, with the crooked arm used as a trademark logo
for all media, including the film titles and advertising. Yet, as in the preceding example, Bass inserts his logo into a white square at the center of
an abstract field of rectangular colors of blue, black, and purple.54 Although
there are no direct precedents for Bass’s colors and design, the impression
created by the irregular and oddly shaped monochromatic rectangles on
a white field, dividing the flat space of the poster into an abstract geometric pattern that looks painted, recalls both Mondrian’s geometric paintings and Josef Albers’s Homage to a Square series, which he started in
1950 and was obsessed with for decades. I think Bass chose blues and
purples because these colors were thought to be cool, like the jazz on the
film’s sound track (Bass would use similar colors for an Elmer Bernstein
music album), in contrast to the hot reds representing the flaming pas-

143

SAUL BASS
sions of Saint Joan and Anatomy of a Murder. Interestingly, Bass substituted brighter colors in some of his collateral materials featuring the same
design. The abstracted arm, of course, remains at the center of the design,
but in the officially released version of the poster, black-and-white photographic images of the stars are placed strategically within the rectangles, so
they do not disturb the overall abstract graphic impression. Bass considered these images a perversion of his original design.
The poster design for Bonjour Tristesse references modern art not only
in its overall color scheme but also in its logo design. As noted in the previous chapter, a face is seen at the end of the title sequence, drawn with a
few simple strokes.55 This also became the logo for the film’s advertising
campaign. Interestingly, Bass implemented a number of different color
schemes in different media. The one-sheet poster places the blue-green
lines of the face—eyes, eyebrows, nose, mouth—in a field of olive green
with a black teardrop. The olive green bleeds through the rough brushstrokes of the line and the teardrop, creating a sense of both melancholy,
through the dominant color, and dissonance, due to the clash of the green
hues. Such color dissonance was a stylistic device used by the German
Expressionists to create a clash of emotions. However, there may have
been other versions of the one-sheet poster with a more pleasingly contrasting blue line against the olive green.56 The window card utilizes a
pink line drawing on a blue background—colors more readily associated
with the sex scene in the photograph at the bottom of the frame.57 A
square formatted advertisement is all hot pink with a blue face, the logo
hovering below two photographic images of near-naked sex between the
principal characters; the black teardrop is the only remaining signification
of Tristesse.
The line drawing of a face and a teardrop in the left eye is reminiscent
of Picasso’s well-known series of simple line drawings Le Visage de la Paix
(1950), which feature the bare outlines of a woman’s face and a dove of
peace. The way a single line connects the nose and the eyebrow is the
same in both, but inverted: Bass anchors the eyebrow that must carry the
weight of the black teardrop with the bridge of the nose, thus balancing
the composition. Bass’s line painting remains symmetrical and is therefore
more conventional than Picasso’s brilliantly off-kilter view of the world.
The Bass image of the face, in its very sparseness of detail (like a mask),
also referenced African art through the filter of European modernism;
African masks had become a huge source of inspiration for European

144

Creating a Mood
modernist painters, whether Picasso, Modigliani, Klee, or the mature
Matisse.58 Indeed, Bass makes this connection visually in Why Man Creates when he cuts from the film’s signature image of a Giacometti-like
human figure against an orange sun to prehistoric human figures cut from
sandstone or from a Picasso painting of a face to an ancient stone sculpture (he pays homage to Picasso by zooming in on his signature, preceded
by signatures of Degas and Rembrandt). In this context, Bass’s use of
brown-toned, uppercase type for the principal actors’ names, as well white
type of the same size for the title, Bonjour Tristesse, both irregularly centered, gives the text a kind of primitive corporality under the mask. Further down, in much smaller type, Bass lays out the crew’s credits in
unobtrusive block text, so that the overwhelming impression of the poster
is indeed the face and the teardrop.
There are, in fact, numerous examples of images and sequences in
Bass’s film work that reference abstract modern art, as discussed later. But
Bass’s most radical attempt to create abstract art may be his unpublished
title sequence for Otto Preminger’s Porgy and Bess (1959).59 Although it
is unclear at what stage the production of these titles was halted in favor
of a more conventional credit sequence (not by Bass), surviving visual
tests in the Saul Bass Papers reveal nothing less than a high art, wholly
abstract, experimental film. Some shots were seemingly created by overlaying cutouts of color folios, and some are simply photographs of painted
abstract patterns. Other abstract shapes seem to have been computer generated, constructed by optically printing individual abstract shapes, or
achieved through masking and colored light. The colors are bright—
intense greens, pinks, purples, and blues—which is fitting, given the film’s
exaggerated, cakewalk-style costumes. These abstract and utterly modernist color forms, referencing such experimental animators as Walter Ruttmann (Opus I–IV), Oskar Fischinger, and Len Lyle (Colour Box), were
probably created by John Whitney, since some of the images strongly
resemble his 1942 film Variations on a Circle. They contrast sharply with
the folksy style of the film’s narrative, which reflects Broadway’s on-again,
off-again enchantment with its own view of African American culture.
Based on the surviving evidence, Bass was gambling that he could convince Preminger to move beyond the graphic but still representational
designs for his Saint Joan and Bonjour Tristesse titles to completely abstract
ones. What can’t be established is how Bass was planning to marry the
abstract animation in the tests to the concrete titles for Porgy and Bess. In

145

SAUL BASS
the end, though, the carnivalesque quality of the George Gershwin opera
and Preminger’s decision to stage it as a costume film mitigated against
any such modernist art experimentation.
That Bass was consciously quoting modernist art as a branding strategy becomes apparent in another unpublished piece: a preview poster for
Storm Center (1956).60 Against a burnt orange background, the bottom
of the frame features “BETTE DAVIS IN STORM CENTER” in red and
white sans serif type; in the upper two-thirds of the frame, a painted image
of a face, in a slightly rougher brushstroke than for Bonjour Tristesse,
appears half on the remains of a burnt piece of paper and half on the
monochrome orange background, with a slice of a Thomas Jefferson
quote in very small type, mimicking an art museum label, just below. The
poster as a whole was just too sophisticated for any commercial distributor, given its modernist art message communicating both the danger to
art when free speech is threatened and art’s recuperative properties.
Instead, the industry-trained publicists got what they wanted with an
A-style poster featuring lots of images and even a hurricane-like swirl
thrown into the mix, the kind of cluttered canvas Bass was trying to wean
the industry of. The fact that Bass’s Storm Center poster was never published as publicity, but was released only later as a piece of Saul Bass art,
indicates yet again that Bass was way ahead of his time and still an industry
outsider.
There is, in fact, a whole category of movie posters within the Bass
canon that could be called the gallery versions. Bass published these posters independently, long after the films’ actual release. They are his preferred versions, his purest idea of how the films’ posters should have
looked. Some were rejected by the distributor or producer as publicity;
some may have been designed after the fact and self-published by Bass in
various journals. Indeed, with the development of an art poster market in
the early 1980s, Bass also began to reprint his posters as silk screens for
sale. The Bass-designed but distributor-rejected posters for Storm Center,
The Magnificent Seven, Grand Prix, Nine Hours to Rama, Seconds, The
Fixer, Tonkô, and Schindler’s List fall into this category.
Saul Bass’s personal versions of his film posters strove for the greatest level of abstraction while still using iconic signs to communicate the
spirit of the film. This process of whittling away visual details to focus on
the simplest and most abstract forms is evident in his publicity work for
Nine Hours to Rama, which also illustrates how complicated the ques-

146

Creating a Mood
tion of authorship can be in commercial design work. Bass’s first designs
were published just before Paul Bacon’s cover design for the original
novel by Stanley Wolpert appeared in March 1962. Surprisingly, Bacon’s
design consists of Bass’s trademark red-orange background; the novel’s
title in black sans serif capitals, centered on the page; and the author’s
name just below in white caps.61 This is an example of Bacon’s “big
book look,” for which he became famous. Similar to Bass’s pars pro toto
aesthetic, Bacon sought to find “something that would be a synthesis
graphically of what the story was about.”62 Surrounding the typography,
Bacon places a multitude of small human figures with their backs to the
viewer; they seem to be running toward some unseen point in the background. Other than defining them as possible followers of Mahatma
Gandhi, there are few other semantic markers to help deconstruct the
image, but it is essentially a figurative and realistic illustration that uses
central perspective.
In contrast, Bass’s pre-release poster, published in January 1962, utilizes a monochromatic and significantly abstracted image of an Indian
guru in the foreground with arms raised; behind him, masses of black
human silhouettes are seen running up an endless staircase.63 The arms
and especially the outstretched hands frame the stairs and the teeming
masses, while “NINE HOURS TO RAMA” appears in white caps just
below the image. The question is, who influenced whom? Did Bass see
the book design before its publication, or did Bacon see Bass’s publicity
work for the film? The idea of the masses running away from the implied
observer-guru is common to both designs, but Bass’s image is both more
semantically concrete (a leader animates the masses) and more abstract
through the monochromatic coloring. Bass would try a similar design for
the poster of The Cardinal but would ultimately reject it.64 The design
concept reappeared, however, on the face of the timepiece that illustrates
several other pieces of collateral material, including the later paperback
edition of the book.65 Bass’s gallery version of the Nine Hours to Rama
poster reduces the content even further: it is an image of Gandhi himself,
shot and lying on the ground, only his forearms, hands (holding a rose),
and head visible within the frame as black silhouettes in a reddish-brown
background. Indeed, this logo-like image captures the essence of the
film’s narrative much better than the previous versions, which are difficult
to read semantically. But of course, this version was too modern for the
producers to consider.

147

SAUL BASS
Bass also began circulating “improved versions” of certain posters
(e.g., The Man with the Golden Arm, Exodus, In Harm’s Way), which to
him meant removing their most obvious advertising features—photos and
credits. Bass began this practice quite early, as Metzl’s description in a
1963 book demonstrates. The author describes Bass posters as having
“succeeded in relegating the inescapable and egocentric credits to a single
line of small type at the bottom of the poster,” which can only refer to
some of Bass’s preferred designs.66 When the British Film Institute staged
a Bass poster show in 2001, these authorized Bass reprints were exhibited
rather than the original posters for the films’ release, a practice that continued with a Kemistry Gallery exhibition in London in 2004.67 It is
understandable that Bass wanted to get his original visions in circulation,
publishing the whole series years after the films in question were released;
however, as a consumer and a poster collector, one would have hoped he
would have been more forthcoming about their provenance.
Although Bass enjoyed a Hollywood comeback as a title designer in
the last decade of his life, he did not return to film posters after designing
the one for Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining (1980). Like his poster for The
Cardinal, The Shining’s is conceptualized around typography—in this
case, Art Goodman’s ghostly image in “THE.” Bass did, however, produce a significant number of film festival posters and posters for various
social causes, usually volunteering his own and his studio’s time. These
posters have a much greater stylistic variety than his film posters, incorporating photographic images for the first time. For example, his French
Bicentennial poster (1989) reprises in toto his trade ads for Storm Center,
to highlight human rights. His photomontage for the 1984 U.S. Olympiad shows an extremely foreshortened diver hurtling through space like
Superman; the same concept, but with a foreshortened strip of film hurtling toward a bright yellow-orange sun, turned up two years later in the
Directors Guild of America Golden Jubilee poster. Equally surrealistic is
Bass’s 1985 Filmex (Los Angeles) poster, where a film can hovers like a
spaceship from Close Encounters of the Third Kind above the California
palms, with a hazy orange-red sun on the horizon. The 35mm aluminum
film can idea also showed up in a number of other film festival posters,
such as the United States Film Festival (1988), the Sundance Film Festival’s earlier incarnation, and the Israel Film Festival in the USA. There
were also some purely graphic art posters, such as those for the Music
Center Unified Fund (1979), the Sinfonia Varsovia World Tour (1987),

148

Creating a Mood
the Twenty-Fifth Chicago Film Festival (1989), and the Special Olympics
(1989). Many of these were handled by Art Goodman, while Bass concentrated on the corporate identity campaigns and, later, the second wave
of film titles.
Although a number of early Bass posters, like the one for Edge of the
City, have only recently been identified by poster dealers as the work of
Saul Bass, his published movie posters constitute a stylistically unique,
modernist art–influenced body of work without equal. Yet for Bass, such
posters were only one element of a broader identity campaign that
involved “paper,” newspaper advertising, and title sequences. Common
to all was the notion of pars pro toto, parts standing in for the whole. This
was first demonstrated in Bass’s campaign for The Man with the Golden
Arm. The great irony is that the twisted arm and hand that would become
the film’s logo in the advertising campaign made an appearance only at
the end of the titles, with Otto Preminger’s credit. Preminger, of course,
knew that the logo would emphasize, without being censurable, the still
taboo subject of drug use in America. The logo thus functions pars pro
toto for the film’s advertising campaign but as only a coda for the titles,
which develop a much more layered and ambiguous narrative that more
closely mirrors the film’s narrative complexity.

The Man with the Golden Arm
Saul Bass liked to end his title sequences with a little surprise, a graphic or
visual punctuation mark to end the sequence and, usually, to emphasize
the director’s credit. In the case of The Man with the Golden Arm, this
takes the form of the distorted and crooked arm that appears at the end of
the sequence, where previously we have seen only straight moving lines.
Likewise, the logos for both Saint Joan and Bonjour Tristesse fade in at the
end of the title sequence with Preminger’s directing credit. The Billy
Wilder credit in a white rectangle jumps out of the two-dimensional space,
attached to a spring like a jack-in-the-box, in The Seven Year Itch. The
titles for Around the World in 80 Days end with an exploding pocket
watch. In Advise and Consent, the dome of the Capitol opens up, like the
lid of a pot, to reveal Preminger’s credit. In the Spartacus title sequence,
the Roman statuary visualized in the background cracks and breaks apart,
like the Roman Empire itself. Yellow flames engulf the screen with the
appearance of Preminger’s final credit in Exodus, possibly a visual trope for

149

SAUL BASS
the Holocaust. Walk on the Wild Side ends with a catfight between the
black “hero” of the title sequence and a white interloper. Bass thus gives
the audience visual and often auditory cues (apart from the director’s
credit) to demarcate the end of his work as title designer and the beginning of the filmmaker’s creative effort.
As noted earlier, the poster for The Man with the Golden Arm privileges the film’s logo at the center of an abstract painting in the style of
Mondrian or the Abstract Expressionists. Most commentators (and Bass
himself) have focused on the logo as a metaphor for the central character’s heroin addiction.68 The titles themselves have also been discussed
in terms of the dominant drug theme: “Bass’ titles for the film feature
spiny, cut-out projectiles, vaguely redolent of veins and syringes that
manage to be disconcerting despite the accompaniment of Elmer Bernstein’s rather brassy jazz score.”69 Another critic has suggested that the
white bars refer to the character Frankie’s drumsticks,70 and Bernstein’s
cool jazz score, a Hollywood popularization of bebop, certainly underscores the abstract rhythm of the moving graphics. However, one could
also read the white square as a poker table surrounded by players and
spectators, and the arm might represent the dealer, who is playing a
crooked game. The placement of the photos in the release poster actually supports such a reading. Likewise, the title sequence—with its
abstract play of straight white lines on a black background, the logo
morphing out of a straight line only at the end of the sequence—can
also be read in terms of gambling, rather than as a metonymy for drug
addiction. Indeed, when Frankie is called “the man with the golden
arm” in the film, it is a gambler referencing the card dealer’s professional
skills, not his drug addiction.
Preminger understood that the drug theme would scandalize the
film and sell theater tickets, but both he and Bass were as interested in
Frankie’s career as a poker player. The game became a metaphor for success or failure in the modern world. Frankie has a golden arm because of
his dealing skills and his ability to control his environment, reflected in
the strict geometry of fifty-two cards. However, he is able to function
only when he is high on heroin. His skill and his addiction are intertwined, as least in his own mind, despite evidence (which the viewer is
privy to) that his skills expand when he is sober. The richness of meaning
in Bass’s titles for The Man with the Golden Arm thus lies in the many
contradictions inherent in the character of Frankie Machine, expressed

150

Creating a Mood
by the symbolic abstraction of animated white bars and static typography,
set to Bernstein’s jazz score.
The titles open with an off-center (left), not quite perpendicular,
thick white line entering the screen from the top and ending just above
the horizontal axis, while “OTTO PREMINGER PRESENTS” appears
horizontally, just below, mostly in the upper left quadrant. Apart from
pointing directly to the important information, the visual design is both
stable (x-y axes) and unstable, due to the bar’s slight diagonal orientation.
Three more bars of varying lengths then appear in a row at the top, again
slightly diagonal, but together they create a stable block around the vertical axis, while the names of the three principal actors appear on the horizontal axis below. Here, the bars might be understood as symbolic of
individuals, the way one might draw four lines and then cross them with
a fifth when keeping count. Next, all but one of the bars fade out, along
with the credits; they are replaced sequentially with three more bars that
enter clockwise from the three sides of the frame, while the film’s title
fades in between the four bars, creating an almost square whose right and
bottom borders form the x-y axes for the upper left quadrant. This visual
design, which is quite stable but has slight irritations, can be read much
more productively as a visual trope for a poker table with four players
rather than in terms of drugs.
All but the right horizontal bar fade out; the remaining line then
extends across the whole screen to form the horizontal axis, followed by a
short bar and a long bar above and below that are slightly off axis. Two
irregular columns of credits in smaller-type (all caps) slide in from screen
left for the secondary actors, above and below the central axis. These horizontal bars might be interpreted as shuffling cards, again emphasizing
Frankie’s role as a card shark. The following credits are universally stable
above and below the horizontal axis, while the accompanying animated
bars around them are slightly off, as if someone were peeking at their
cards. Finally, one bar shifts forty-five degrees to a perpendicular position,
just off the vertical axis, as columns of technical credits slide in from the
left and the right to stabilize the image. Visually, Bass is continually playing with stability and instability in his composition, mirroring Frankie’s
states of being sober and stoned. Thus, while the environment of illegal
gambling fuels the poker dealer’s addiction (as would the music business,
if he were to break in), Bass and Preminger downplay the film title’s more
lurid association with heroin addiction by performing an abstract ballet of

151

SAUL BASS
moving bars in the title sequence that metaphorically visualizes a poker
game—the game itself being a metaphor for Frankie’s struggle with both
his addiction and his surroundings. Indeed, the narrative is very much
about the Sinatra character’s inability to escape from a profession he is
very good at.
Only the final four vertical bars separating the technical credits at
screen left and right mutate into the jagged hand of a drug addict or a
crooked card player, protruding down from the top of the frame and ending at Preminger’s horizontal directing credit. Frankie’s crooked card dealing is never made completely clear in the film’s narrative, but it may explain
why his employers insist that he deal the cards in a high-stakes game with
out-of-towners. Such a reading of the title animation obviously contradicts
almost everything Bass has said about his work, but it can be supported by
the overall design as well as other production facts. For example, because
the film lacked a seal from the Motion Picture Production Code Office,
there was an incentive to devise visual strategies to finesse local censorship
boards, which were likely to be sensitive to realistic depictions of sexuality
and violence. Bass and Preminger felt that, given the controversy over the
filming of Nelson Algren’s well-known novel about drug addiction, they
would be well advised to avoid any overt visual references to the topic, as
well as any exploitive taglines such as “I was a drug addict!”71 Abstraction
in the titles and the ad campaign permitted knowing winks to consumers
without upsetting the guardians of social morality.
Interestingly, in his own after-the-fact description of the title sequence,
Bass, too, emphasized the topic of drugs: “Intent was to create a spare,
gaunt, intensity that would reflect, in spirit, the character of the film, about
drug addiction.”72 However, this rereading of the sequence may have
occurred after the film’s drug theme caused such a scandal.73 Bass may have
forgotten that his original intention was to capture the film’s entire narrative about the antihero’s profession as a gambler and his attempts to become
a musician—a goal frustrated by his drug addiction. Instead, Bass liked to
recall an argument he had with Preminger over whether the graphics in The
Man with the Golden Arm should move. It bears quoting in full because of
what it reveals about Bass’s ability to focus attention on process without
revealing anything about their discussions of content and design:
At one point, having created the symbol, Otto and I looked at
each other and said: “Why not put it at the head of the film and

152

Creating a Mood
make it move.” And zaaap!!! I was launched on my parallel career
as a filmmaker! I did a title for The Man with the Golden Arm.
Now—Otto liked my idea for the title. But he thought it
should be a series of non-moving images. I thought it had to
move. We disagreed. The exchange became volatile. Finally, I
stalked out. Went back to my office. And sulked. I sat there, still
steaming. Time went by. I calmed down. I began to think . . .
“Gee, I blew it!! I really do want to do that title!” I thought a
little. “Hmmmmm . . . non-moving images . . . it could have a
certain kind of stylistic character and emotional effect . . . static
images . . . sharp cuts . . . kinetic movement . . . hmmm.” . . . I
began to warm up to the idea. I began to like it.
The phone rang. It was Otto. “Hello, Saul—you know, you
are right. It should move!”
“But wait a minute Otto, it’s really more interesting if it
doesn’t. It could [give] us a kind of kinetic. . . .” —Bam! That
started another altercation.
Finally, he said: “I insist! And you will see how wrong you
are!”
And he was right. And I was right.74
Indeed, the titles caused a sensation in the industry and the press and possibly among audiences, although there are no hard data to back up the
latter assertion. Both Variety and the Hollywood Reporter explicitly praised
the credits in their reviews of the film, a unique occurrence up to that
time, with the latter noting that the titles “give it the distinction of a carefully fashioned book.”75
Bass’s advertising campaign and credit sequence for The Man with the
Golden Arm are still considered the official start of his Hollywood career,
even though it was neither his first film logo campaign nor his first title
work (honors for both belong to Carmen Jones). In fact, he had been
involved in Hollywood film advertising since the late 1930s. However,
the controversial nature of the film and the modernist simplicity of Bass’s
stark black-and-white moving graphics in the title sequence catapulted the
designer into the center of the Hollywood scene. From that point on,
Bass would, with more or less authority and with varying degrees of success, attempt to develop a new brand for each film project he worked on,
often employing recurring images and tropes that would eventually con-

153

SAUL BASS
stitute the Saul Bass brand. Ironically, despite Bass’s modernist aesthetics,
the designer often employed visual themes that have traditionally been
associated with the elements of nature and various primitive forms of spirituality: fire, water, earth, and air. Some commentators have argued that
Bass changed after he moved to California—a smart, urban Jew transformed into a cowboy hat–wearing westerner with a strong pagan bent.
Indeed, the rainbow imagery discussed earlier perfectly encapsulates the
epistemological contradiction between the materialist concerns of modernism and the mystical-spiritual thrust of many of Bass’s recurring motifs;
this contradiction is also inherent in Gestalt theory and design, as understood and practiced by Moholy-Nagy and Kepes. However, one might
also theorize that, in its American corporate incarnation, modernist design
itself became hybridized with nativist and romantic imagery and that this
was especially true of California modernism. Indeed, a similar phenomenon is apparent with regard to early American avant-garde cinema as well
as the post–Maya Deren film avant-garde: “If we theorize that many of
the city films of the American avant-garde constructed a mixture of modernist formal elements and romantic desires, then the avant-garde’s depiction of nature seems to be a more direct expression of American romantic
sensibilities. . . . What connected the American avant-garde filmmakers to
Romanticism, however, was their interest not only in depicting nature,
however abstracted, but more importantly, in utilizing nature as a visual
metaphor for the expression of human (mostly male) subjectivity.”76

Fire Signs: Carmen Jones, Storm Center, Exodus
The advertising campaign and titles for Carmen Jones marked the first
time Saul Bass employed an image of fire. He would return to that elemental sign repeatedly in his design work and as an image in his films,
ending with his last, Casino. Like the pre-Socratic Greek philosophers
who believed that water, air, earth, and fire were the elemental constituents of the universe, Bass was fascinated by the cultural iconographies
attached to these elements. One might have thought the mystical features
of such a Weltbild would seem alien to someone who grew up in a cosmopolitan environment. Yet in Bass’s films, images of fire often appear as a
life-giving force associated with the heat and light of the sun—for example, in the scientific “creation of the universe” sequences in The Searching
Eye, Why Man Creates, and The Solar Film. Here, fire’s power is far beyond

154

Creating a Mood
the control and comprehension of human beings; it is an elemental power
of nature required to fuel all life on the planet. When the sun’s energy is
withdrawn or is no longer available, as in Quest, human life collapses.
Ironically, whereas the sun has always been depicted in symbolic abstractions as a circle, fire and flames cannot be visually contained by the frame.
Unlike circles, squares, and lines, its form is imprecise, constantly shifting
and changing; it is an image in motion even when it is static and twodimensional. Some of Bass’s interest in images of fire, then, must be
attributed to his formal sense, utilizing fire’s undulating form and intense
color as a counterweight to the ordered and controlled presentation of his
typography or simply reveling in the glory of uncontrollable image making, just as fire symbolizes unbridled passion to the point of
self-destructiveness.
Employing a drawing of a flame and a feather in a perpendicular relationship, Bass’s first use of a fire sign was in the logo for Phoenix Corporation, an independent production company owned by film producers
Daniel Taradash and Julian Blaustein.77 At the time, Bass was designing
titles for the company’s film Storm Center, which also features fire imagery. Placing his symbols on vertical and horizontal axes, Bass hoped to
signify a dichotomy: the anarchic force of nature versus the written, communicating, and civilizing word. With a slight semantic shift, a painted
flaming torch symbolizes purity and passion in the Bass-designed poster
for UNESCO’s Human Rights Week in 1963, the prominent red flames
and typography depicting freedom.78 Here, Bass taps into powerful collective imagery to give symbolic meaning to fire, a meaning associated
with a salutary Promethean myth. However, fire’s physical properties also
allow it to be understood symbolically as a destructive force of nature that
can extinguish life. For example, in Phase IV, a farming family attempts to
defend themselves against invading ants by lighting a perimeter trench
filled with oil and creating a wall of fire. Bass’s poster for Exodus has flames
at its center to signify both the Holocaust, in which Jewish bodies were
burned en masse in furnaces, and the revolutionary struggle of the young
Israeli state. And in Carmen Jones, Bass communicates the passion of sexual desire and its destructive power through the iconography of flames.
Bass’s first noncorporate logo, specifically designed for a movie campaign, was the black rose in flames for Otto Preminger’s Carmen Jones.
Although the logo was not used on every piece of advertising for the film,
it did appear on Preminger’s stationery, the title lobby card, and the

155

SAUL BASS
record album. It also appeared as a graphic element in the B-style poster
but was not included in the better-known A-style poster (also designed by
Bass), which utilized a striking painting by Albert Kallis of Carmen in a
red dress, looking sultry between the bedposts. It is unclear why Bass
chose not to include the logo, but he may have understood that Kallis’s
figure would have suffered, as it did when it was reduced in size with the
logo appended on one version of the one-sheet poster. The logo made a
solo appearance on the title card of the lobby card set and, along with the
Kallis figure, on the window card; it was featured exclusively on the cover
of the sound-track album and on Preminger’s production stationery. The
logo consisted of a hand-drawn outline of a black rose against a background of red flames; however, some posters, such as the French lobby
card distributed by 20th Century–Fox, included only the outline of the
rose against a white background.
The Bass-designed logo of the rose in flames communicates a rich and
layered iconography dating back to the ancient Egyptians. The rose was
associated with the goddess Isis, whose beauty and power were venerated.
Given this religious pedigree, it is not surprising that Greco-Roman cultures also used a rose to symbolize the beauty of Aphrodite, the goddess
of love—an association that plays a central role in Carmen Jones’s iconography. In Christian iconography, as manifested in medieval painting, the
rose is a sign of Christ’s suffering on the cross. Fire, in contrast, is associated with both the destructive and life-giving forces of nature, fueling love
and passion and serving as a method of ritual purification.
As played by Dorothy Dandridge, Carmen Jones is an African American sexpot. She appears with a red rose between her teeth and another
in her hair, both mirroring her flaming red skirt—the color associated
with passion. Carmen Jones is thus marked as a creature who consumes
men with abandon, living only for her own pleasure. The flames communicate sexual heat and desire but also the fact that those who give in
to unbridled passion will eventually be consumed and destroyed, including Carmen and her hapless lover Joe, played by Harry Belafonte. Fire
is also associated with alchemy and magic, turning Carmen into a sorceress who is able to bewitch men with her feminine wiles. Indeed, Dandridge, who was previously associated with rather cool, nonsexual roles
(e.g., in Bright Road), not only changed her personal iconography with
Carmen Jones but also began a passionate love affair with director Otto
Preminger.79

156

Creating a Mood
Bass’s titles for Carmen Jones play with many of these signifiers. The
center of the black frame is dominated by a red flame that shoots up from
the bottom and cuts the wide-screen image perpendicularly at the vertical
axis. The flame is in constant motion but generally keeps its long, narrow
shape while it burns in an otherwise black space. The outline drawing of
a black rose is visible within the red flame; its flower is placed just below
the horizontal axis, and its stem protrudes from the bottom of the frame.
The image communicates both movement and stasis, the force of nature
in the flames and the mark of beauty in the iconic rose. The white, allcaps, serif typography either cuts the flame horizontally around the center
axis (for the major credits) or is placed in columns on the left-hand side of
the screen or at both screen left and right, leaving the flame continuously
visible. Given that we hear Bizet’s overture to Carmen on the sound track
as the typography fades in and out, it is natural that Bass chose a more
archaic-looking serif type. The surprise of the subsequent live-action scene
is that the film is staged in modern dress.
As in so many of Bass’s posters, only three colors—red, black, and
white—are visible in the titles. The red flame (created with red filters)
seemingly burns in darkness, thus highlighting the white names in the
credits. There is something uncanny about the stringent, formal composition of the visual elements and the flame that emits no light. Here, the
flame is both unreal and very much a controlled burn; it is visually identical to an eternal flame, Bass having devised a symbolic rendering of the
dead Carmen’s cemetery monument. Such a reading of Bass’s titles would
reframe the ensuing narrative as a flashback and cast a sense of doom over
the story of a woman who has paid for her sins—not necessarily a spoiler,
given that Bizet’s work is well known to opera lovers. Thus, while the
color red symbolizes Carmen’s passion and desire, the flame here may signify the quiet peacefulness of a grave.
Flames and fire take on a specific historical meaning in Bass’s credit
sequence for Storm Center (1956). The film concerns a small-town librarian who refuses to take a book off the shelf despite pressure by the community, even after she is unjustly branded a Communist. Indeed, the
flames that engulf the screen near the end of the titles refer directly to the
evening of 10 May 1933, when Nazi organizations staged book burnings
in all the major German cities, consigning some of the greatest books of
the nineteenth and twentieth centuries to the flames. Among the eighty-

157

SAUL BASS
seven authors whose works were burned were Walter Benjamin, Bertolt
Brecht, John Dos Passos, Theodore Dreiser, Albert Einstein, Sigmund
Freud, André Gide, Ernest Hemingway, James Joyce, Franz Kafka, Karl
Marx, Marcel Proust, Erich Maria Remarque, Arthur Schnitzler, H. G.
Wells, and Stefan Zweig. The books of many of these same authors will
burn in the town’s library at the end of the film’s narrative.
Stanley Kramer began this project in 1951, when the film was titled
The Library and Mary Pickford was slated to play the lead. The title was
changed to Circle of Fire, and production began in mid-September 1952.
However, production came to a halt after the first day’s shoot: Pickford
refused to return to the set because the film was in black and white.80 It is
possible that Pickford pulled out because of the controversial subject matter and because the House Un-American Activities Committee was at its
most powerful. Barbara Stanwyck was brought in to replace Pickford, but
the film was ultimately shelved. It was picked up several years later by
Daniel Taradash and Julian Blaustein’s production company, which hired
Bette Davis for the starring role. Another screenwriter, Eric Moll, was
brought in to revise Kramer’s script. Shot almost entirely in Santa Rosa,
California, the film was budgeted at $750,000.81 Since Bass had designed
stationery for the company, it was not surprising that he was asked to do
the titles.
The background of the white typography in the titles consists of three
elements. First, there is an open book with two columns of text spilling
over into the left and right sides of the frame; the white inside margins
create a wide, empty swath, with a line at the “spine” on the vertical axis.
The margins of the text are slightly off center, as if they really were pages
in a book. The text is slightly out of focus, so the audience cannot actually
read it, but the typography clearly denotes a book; it also functions within
the title frame as two blocks over which the credits can be seen. The production company and Bette Davis’s name above the title appear sequentially at center screen, before Bass dissolves to a double exposure of a
young boy’s face and the book page, followed by the film’s title. Of all the
facial features, the boy’s eyes (the second element) are privileged within
the composition of the frame. The eyes move right and left, then look
directly at the camera, seemingly reading the text the audience sees. By
visually overlapping the book and its reader, Bass devises a visual trope for
the act of reading and the acquisition of knowledge through reading.
However, that first impression is wrong: the eyes are looking far beyond

158

Creating a Mood
the text to an invisible horizon, as if searching for danger. The eyes are the
most important organ in Bass’s world. Thus, one might also read the eyes
as belonging to the librarian, their movement a metaphor for her vigilance
over the books, freedom of speech, and personal liberty. Seeing is knowledge. And yet the gender ambiguity of the face is heightened by the fact
that the image is cut off below the bridge of the nose, effectively rendering the subject mouthless and therefore speechless. Are these renderings
of the dead who cannot speak, those whose writings are being silenced by
bans and book burnings?
As the credits continue to fade in and out (all caps, sans serif type, justified to the frame, placed on a grid), the book begins to burn at the bottom right corner. At first, only a small flame is visible; then the page is
burned away, revealing an uncharred page below. Here is the third element in Bass’s design: fire. The fire coincides with a column of technical
credits at screen left, followed by a second left-justified column, including
“Titles by Saul Bass.” As the next credits appear, the page is slowly
engulfed in flames, leaving behind the charred black pages of the book
and the face. One eye remains visible through the flames. The superimposition signifies that both the book and the human subject are burning.
Here, then, Bass brilliantly visualizes Heinrich Heine’s dictum: where
they burn books they will sooner or later burn people. By the time the
director’s credit appears, the screen is a raging inferno, with the eye of the
subject only faintly visible in the darkness, an apt if abstract metaphor for
the Shoah. The explicit reference to the Shoah in the titles is supported by
the fact that the more legible text in the identically designed trade ads is
printed in Hebrew. Storm Center, then, is a cautionary, liberal-hearted tale
of American democracy, the First Amendment, and intellectual freedom—
not exactly popular topics at the height of the anti-Communist witch
hunts. The Catholic Legion of Decency gave the film a special negative
rating in 1956, something it had done only once before in the case of
Blockade (1938), William Dieterle’s thinly veiled Spanish Civil War story.
It noted: “Propaganda film offers a warped, oversimplified and strongly
emotional solution to the complex problem of civil liberties in America.”82 Bass, through the montage of three distinct images, abstractly visualizes the Holocaust, implying, like Heine, that the elimination of free
speech can lead to genocide and mass murder.
However, Bass’s advertising campaign for Storm Center uses the same
visual elements to offer a slightly different message. In full-color trade ads,

159

SAUL BASS
the monochromatic eyes and face of a woman form the background,
while the ad’s vertical axis is a line of fire in natural colors that splits the
face in half and forms a cross with “BETTE DAVIS [red type] in STORM
CENTER [white lettering]” on the horizontal axis. The advertisement’s
right side also features a column of book text and a brownish-orange tint,
further visually dividing the woman’s face. The photographic image of the
woman, the book text (whose left side is burning), and the typography
create layers of signifiers over signifiers. All the previous clusters of meaning surrounding books, knowledge, and the Holocaust are played out
here; in addition, the splitting of the physiognomy, which doesn’t occur
in the titles, allows us to read the image as a split in the human psyche,
whereby good and evil can coexist, thus articulating at least one theory of
why (wo)man shows such inhumanity to (wo)man. The largely rectangular image becomes the anchor for many of the trade advertisements, which
sport a large black space above the image and the statement: “In all the
years no picture has said this!” In some of these ads, Davis and the title
appear as a typographical border, separating the black space above from
the logo-like image below. Other advertisements, which do not look like
Bass designs, feature a circular vortex to designate the storm, which is
reminiscent of Vertigo but much cruder.
If Storm Center’s visual trope signifying the Shoah is subtle enough to be
missed by the less visually literate members of the audience, then Bass’s
advertising campaign for Exodus was even less explicit, with the equally
abstract iconography of fire applicable to a variety of interpretations. By
having a photographic image burn off on the Exodus poster and other
visual collateral, Bass borrows directly from his Storm Center titles, charring the bottom edge of the photo (rather than a book page) as the flame
consumes it. At the same time, Bass places his Exodus logo at the center of
the poster and in the opening title, again juxtaposing, as with Carmen
Jones, an abstract logo and a realistic image of fire.
Exodus began life as a film pitch when the production head of MetroGoldwyn-Mayer, Dore Schary, hired Leon Uris to write a screenplay
about the Jewish struggle to establish a homeland in Israel. Uris’s agent,
Ingo Preminger (Otto’s brother), convinced Schary to fund the writer’s
research in Israel.83 By the time the novel was completed, Schary had been
fired; Abe Vogel, MGM’s new head, was less than enthusiastic about a
highly political, anti-British film. Otto Preminger, however, was excited

160

Creating a Mood
about the project and purchased the screen rights in May 1958, four
months before the novel was published; it became an international best
seller and was the most popular novel in the United States since Gone with
the Wind. Uris felt taken advantage of by the Preminger brothers because
Otto paid MGM only its original investment of $75,000, rather than the
six figures the screen rights would have been worth after publication of
the novel. Preminger next went to Arthur Krim at United Artists to secure
a $4 million budget for the film.84 Then he hired blacklisted writer Dalton
Trumbo to write the screenplay, giving Trumbo his first official screen
credit in more than a decade and helping to break the blacklist.85 By the
first day of production on 29 March 1960, Bass had designed and UA had
published advertisements in the trades, featuring the Exodus logo,
announcing advance ticket sales for the Warner Theater in New York, a
Chicago theater, and the Fox Wilshire in Los Angeles on 21 December
1960, the day of the premiere.86 Bass had also hired John Whitney to do
film tests for the Exodus titles, which, ironically, were built not around the
theme of fire but of water—specifically, footage of the surf.87 Bass and
Preminger may have been thinking about illegal immigrants to Palestine
landing on the beach, which is in fact the way the film begins.
Bass’s Exodus logo plays off his Spartacus logo, designed only months
earlier for that film’s September 1960 release. The Spartacus logo, which
was used only sparingly on posters and other publicity, features the silhouette of a Roman gladiator’s torso and raised arm brandishing a sword.
Exodus’s logo highlights arms outstretched toward the sky, with one arm
holding a rifle perpendicular. Both logos communicate armed struggle
and revolution, but the rifle signifies that Exodus is not a biblical epic, as
the title might imply, but a contemporary story. Visualizing multiple arms
rather than a single arm denotes that this struggle is that of a whole people
rather than a charismatic individual, as in Spartacus. The logo is anchored
to the title directly below, appearing in all capitals and a sans serif, military
stencil font,88 which communicates the martial nature of this exodus. In
the 1980s Bass started printing and selling an authorized version of the
Exodus poster with the black logo on an Israeli blue background, but for
the film’s official release poster, he added the element of fire.
Printed on a white background, the central image consists of the
abstract logo in black and the military stenciled title in white, printed on
top of what appears to be a sky blue photograph that is burning behind
the title but also partially obscuring the logo. The flames consuming the

161

SAUL BASS
photo are seen only in that image, so if we assume the photograph is
depicting some level of reality, the photo both captures the flames and is
simultaneously destroyed by them. Unlike the credit sequence, though,
where the flame is more like a torch, the fire on the poster art covers the
whole bottom of the image. The poster thus functions at various semantic
levels and juxtaposes unlike signifiers, such as an iconic image of real fire
and the symbolic logo. The yellow flames can therefore be understood as
both the flames of revolt for the Jewish nation in Palestine and the raging
fire of the Holocaust, out of which arose the Jewish survivors’ struggle to
find a homeland.
Bass’s titles start with a monochromatic royal blue background over
which the words “OTTO PREMINGER PRESENTS” appear in white
caps and centered. A moment later, a yellow flame licks up from the bottom of the frame, exactly at the center axis; this fire seemingly starts below
the visible image. As the first title fades out, it is replaced by the black Exodus logo at the vertical axis and just above the horizontal axis; this is followed by the white, apparently hand-drawn title in caps, just below the
horizontal axis and the logo, mirroring Bass’s preferred poster design, but
with the yellow flame flickering over both. Here again, Bass limits his
color palette to black and white and two complementary colors, blue and
yellow, allowing the typography and the moving image of the flame to
stand out. Next, both logo and title disappear, and the names of the principal actors fade in and out on the horizontal axis, alternating between
screen left and screen right. As the grid-based credits continue, the yellow
flame moves to the right or left across the bottom of the frame, making
room for columns of credits on either side. Only after the credit for producer and director Otto Preminger appears on the screen does the flame
spread out over the entire bottom of the frame; it then engulfs the whole
screen and partially obscures the last credit, which finally fades out, leaving the screen an inferno. Thus, for much of the two-and-a-half-minute
title sequence, the image of fire resembles an eternal flame, as seen at war
memorials and other commemorative sites, and indeed, this film is a
memorial to those who fought and died in the first Israeli war. The closing
image, however, cannot help but conjure up the Holocaust, the last remnants of typography symbolizing 6 million dead, just as the lone eye does
in Storm Center.89
Bass would include an inferno in the opening credits one last time for
Martin Scorsese’s Casino, which would also prove to be Bass’s last screen

162

Creating a Mood
credit. In that film, a firebomb opens the proceedings, but for the most
part, the titles are about the phantasmagoric lights of Las Vegas rather
than corpses rotting in shallow desert graves.

Water Signs: In Harm’s Way, Cape Fear
Saul Bass’s poster for In Harm’s Way features the outstretched arm of a
U.S. Navy admiral pointing off into the distance, implying that the officer
is responsible for sending many men to their deaths on the battlefields of
Iwo Jima, Guadalcanal, and Okinawa. For visual emphasis, the arm is
white, cutting through the otherwise black background at the horizontal
axis, while blue typography lists the principal actors. Since the black rectangle covers only the top two-thirds of the one-sheet poster, a second
logo—now with a black arm and the film’s title slanting upward, as if
attached to the arm—is centered in the white space below. This is the only
time Bass used a logo twice on the same poster. Adding the title to the
logo literalizes the message of the military power structure sending soldiers in harm’s way, but that may have been necessary to guarantee the
legibility of the “trademark,” as Variety called it, if it were to function as
publicity before audiences were familiar with the film’s narrative. In fact,
the In Harm’s Way logo and “one world” ad campaign concept were
designed and approved before the film even began shooting.90 This was a
strategy Bass and Preminger used repeatedly, at least as far back as Anatomy of a Murder. Interestingly, the smaller Bass logo-title seemingly
anchors the black rectangle above, as Bass again applies the Bauhaus lessons of balance and counterbalance, as well as visual repetition.
Given that the design phase was completed before film production
began, it’s not surprising that there is little connection between the iconic
message of the logo and Bass’s titles. The poster’s logo and typography
were both handled by Art Goodman, with Bass functioning as art director.91 The logo does, however, appear with the film’s title—seemingly
drawn in white chalk onto a live-action image of the film’s opening location—but the remaining titles come at the end of the film. Unlike the
logo, which is a concrete and symbolic representation of a generally
understood nonverbal gesture, the closing title sequence uses water in its
various forms as a metaphor for the film’s temporal arc from peace to war
and back to peace; concrete images of war appear only at the end of the
sequence, with shots of an atom bomb exploding over Hiroshima and

163

SAUL BASS
Nagasaki. Bass himself described the titles as follows: “This opening consists of a symbolic live-action montage, which parallels roughly the historical span of the film. Starting just before the Japanese attack on Pearl
Harbor, it chronicles the United States entry and participation in the war
against Japan, and ends with the explosion of the Hiroshima Bomb.”92
The titles’ typography and design conform completely to the Bass style:
white sans serif type, capital letters placed on a grid, with left and right
justification. Of more interest are the visuals.
Like American avant-garde filmmakers Ralph Steiner (H2O, 1928),
Henwar Rodakiewicz (Portrait of a Young Man, 1931), and Slavko Vorkapich (Moods of the Sea, 1942), Saul Bass traffics in highly romantic metaphors of nature. The credits open with images of a glistening surf on a
quiet beach; the surf and the waves increase in size and strength as the
credits proceed and reach an initial crescendo as the water forms a monster funnel, sucking everything into its vortex. The montage highlights
water in motion, abstractly, as pure movement; water flows horizontally
to the right, then the view is from under the waves, an abstract symphony
of water movement. The credits fade in and out as if in concert with the
light and dark of a turbulent sea, increasing their legibility. Then the storm
breaks loose and the viewer is on an invisible ship, riding out a tremendous storm that culminates in huge explosions on the water for the major
behind-the-scenes credits. This is followed by an oil fire, shot from above,
just as Otto Preminger’s usual credit as producer and director appears. If
we accept Bass’s historical chronology of the title sequence, the explosions and atom bomb come at war’s end. The previous images of the
storm are purely metaphorical signifiers of war, without any concrete historical references. Such images of nature have the potential effect of naturalizing images of war. However, the ensuing shots of billowing clouds of
burning oil directly reference well-known newsreel footage of U.S. Navy
ships burning out of control in Pearl Harbor, although we never see any
ships in Bass’s footage.
Unfortunately, the cut to the atom bomb might make sense as a historical marker, but it appears to be a sudden and undue visual and conceptual escalation from the previous images of explosions. Bass may not have
intended it, but it is possible to read the montage of images referencing
Pearl Harbor and the atom bomb as punishment of the Japanese people
for the crime of aggression. The shots of bombs exploding can also be
read as unnatural acts in what is otherwise the natural order of things.

164

Creating a Mood
Whether the God-like point of view in the shots of burning oil was meant
to be an inside joke on Preminger remains a matter of speculation, but
once the credit fades out, Bass cuts in the footage of an atom bomb explosion, followed by a full-moon shot and a return to the glistening and now
calm ocean surf. Bass thus constructs a circular narrative by opening and
closing on identical images of a calm and peaceful sea. However, the intercutting of an image of a full moon between the bomb and the beach is
more perplexing. The moon and water are soul mates in some mythologies, but in any case, the image of a full moon feminizes the progression
of signifiers. Then again, the shot may function only as visual punctuation,
signifying a moment of rest before nature again takes its course.
Thus, while the titles depict the phrase “the gathering storm,” taken
from Sir Winston Churchill’s multivolume history of World War II, it is
unclear whether audiences made the connection as envisioned by Bass.
They may have understood the title sequence as replicating the subjective
experience of sailors at sea during World War II. Conversely, the use of
water and storm imagery implies that war is a natural, possibly unavoidable phenomenon. No matter how the images are interpreted metaphorically, the montage of seawater harks backward and forward to the film
avant-garde.
Ironically, Bass employs water to communicate a completely different,
ominous sense of dread in Cape Fear. Rather than crashing waves, as in In
Harm’s Way, he uses water’s reflective qualities on a calm surface. The
changing surface creates abstract patterns of movement in muted browns,
greens, and golds, which resemble an Abstract Expressionist painting in
motion but also reproduce images in Ralph Steiner’s H2O. The slightly
agitated movement of the water renders the surface opaque, making it
possible for Bass to superimpose black-and-white images that seem to
undulate under the water’s surface; though they are never completely hidden, they are not distinctly visible either, adding to the sense of dread,
especially in conjunction with Bernard Herrmann’s ominous music as
orchestrated by Elmer Bernstein.
Cape Fear was the first Saul Bass title sequence in decades to receive
specific comment in contemporary film reviews. Leonard Maltin noted on
his television program Entertainment Tonight: “When I started watching
Cape Fear and the titles came on, I was mesmerized. Watching those titles
reminded me of how much a creative title sequence can do to set the tone

165

SAUL BASS
of the film.” The Hollywood Reporter’s film critic chimed in: “A shimmeringly eerie title sequence, pulses and punctuates with steady, coursing
energy. Depths of praise to title-ists Elaine and Saul Bass for the surging
undercurrents.” Finally, New York Magazine commented on Bass’s
uncanny ability to set the stage for the violent action to follow, without
ever showing any violence: “From its opening shots of scary faces wavering beneath placid water, under the sensational fractionalized title
sequence by Elaine and Saul Bass, Cape Fear palpitates with dread.”93
Such notices documented that Bass had indeed made a Hollywood
comeback.
The film opens on a dark screen with the sound of rain falling and
low rumbling thunder, followed by a fade-in to a mostly green body of
water, the wind creating horizontal patterns on its surface while the
names of the production companies appear in white caps at screen left,
punctuated by the blast of horns and strings on the sound track. Other
names that appear above the title include Martin Scorsese (screen left)
and the principal actors’ names, which are placed in succession from left
to right on a horizontal axis (a Bass trademark), while the coloration of
the water’s surface creates a zigzag vertical axis. Before the actors’ names
appear, however, the image of an eagle is superimposed on the water; it
flies closer and closer, its claws threatening, as if it were hovering over the
water. The shot is identical to an image Bass used in the original final
sequence from Phase IV; before that, he used a variation in Why Man
Creates. The image dissolves to a closer shot of the water, with blues,
oranges, and dirty greens shifting to and fro as the film’s title appears
centered on the screen. As he did with Psycho thirty years earlier, Bass
slices the typography in two horizontally, shifting one layer ever so
slightly to create a stronger sense of discontinuity. Once the title fades
out, a close-up black-and-white moving image of a distorted eye appears,
as if it is under the water’s surface.
The titles for Cape Fear thus consist of four distinct elements: (1) the
sans serif typography with the visual hiccup; (2) the play of abstract color
and light on the water’s surface, moving from horizontal to vertical patterns (the switch coming with Saul and Elaine Bass’s credit) and then back
to horizontal patterns as indistinct shadows darken and then lighten the
water’s surface; (3) barely visible monochromatic moving images, their
shapes distorted as if the light beneath the waves has been broken—an
eye, a mouth with teeth, a head, a body; and (4) Elmer Bernstein’s score,

166

Creating a Mood
which uses strings and woodwinds to increase the sense of dread inherent
in the visuals.
The double exposures of shimmering color images of water and highcontrast black-and-white images are subject to multiple interpretations.
One reading might theorize them as akin to subliminal images, their legibility so limited behind the shimmering water that audiences might miss
their actual content altogether, yet they communicate an uncanny sense of
danger that comes from under the water. The distorted eye and head
recall Bass’s Seconds as well as Vertigo’s titles; all three films feature apparently weak central characters who aren’t strong subjects for audience
identification. Bass was quite vocal about his intentions with regard to
the titles: “Our concept for the film was based on the notion of submerged emotions—the back potentials of the psyche. The spine of the
concept was water. The entire title consists of water, and the water
changes: it becomes more and more abstract, until what you see are flickering reflections. . . . Then we began to introduce other images that
added levels of unease and uncertainty. Using simple optical devices, we
put the images under water and distorted them. Eventually the water
becomes the emotional whiplash of form and color with disturbing emotional undercurrents.”94
Using water’s physical qualities to reflect, refract, and absorb light,
Bass creates a canvas in motion that can be mistaken for a piece of Abstract
Expressionist art. It is an inspired idea, given that Abstract Expressionism
is all about expressing emotion, and given Bass’s interest in visualizing
emotional and psychological states. At a purely formal level, the play with
light on the water’s surface pays homage to the film avant-garde, especially Steiner’s H2O and a number of Steiner films from the 1960s. Water
images are both an index of a real geographic place, the houseboat home
of the family at the narrative’s center, and a metaphor for emotional and
psychic states of mind that reside below the surface of consciousness. One
film critic misremembered the camera rising up out of the swamp, which
doesn’t actually happen until much later in the film. However, the characterization of the water as a swamp is relevant because swamps signify danger. Swamps may look calm on the surface, but underneath lurk all kinds
of dangerous wildlife. But it is also relevant because swamps are metaphors for moral corruption, which defines both the protagonist and the
antagonist. Water’s transparency and simultaneous opacity make it a perfect metaphor for the human mind. This point is confirmed by the last

167

SAUL BASS
titles, when the water’s dirty greens give way to blood-red tints filling the
screen, as Martin Scorsese’s directorial credit appears and a negative image
of Juliette Lewis’s eyes fades in as she begins her first-person narrative. It
is a horrific moment, the red screen referencing blood (as it did in Goodfellas) and also foreshadowing the film’s climactic finale, the image of the
eye indicating that there are witnesses to the horror.
Ironically, unlike Bass’s fire imagery, his water imagery lacks any of
the usual life-affirming and life-renewing connotations of water. Instead,
his water imagery functions on a metaphorical level as a dangerous and
unknowable space, whether it serves as a naturalized signification of war
or as a visual metaphor for the conscious and unconscious mind. In Cape
Fear, Bass may also be depicting the phrase “return of the repressed,”
since it is Max Cade’s return, after he has been forgotten by the protagonist, that functions as the narrative’s central event. The utilization of water
imagery allows Bass to create formalist film montages that are indistinguishable from avant-garde films. Meanwhile, Bass also demonstrates a
fascination with ordinary objects, which he wants us to see in a new light,
tearing them out of their everyday, almost invisible context. Throughout
his career, Bass repeatedly returned to this exercise of turning the commonplace into the extraordinary.

Objets Trouvés: Advise and Consent, Nine Hours to Rama,
The War of the Roses, The Age of Innocence
Saul Bass was a master of creating visual symbols or logos for the advertising campaigns he devised for Otto Preminger, among others. Part of that
talent involved finding an object or sign that could represent the film as a
whole. The same pars pro toto aesthetic inherent in creating logocentric
advertising campaigns and posters was also at work in conceptualizing
title sequences that placed everyday objects at the center of their design.
Referencing Nine Hours to Rama, Bass notes in his own film, Bass on
Titles, that “one of the most challenging aspects of any creative endeavor
is dealing with ordinary things, dealing with things we know so well, we
cease to see them.” Bass liked to take everyday objects and make them
strange, forcing us to look at them anew with a different set of eyes. These
found objects are imbued with symbolic and metaphorical weight in various title sequences: an American flag in Advise and Consent; a globe–
beach ball in It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World; a timepiece in Nine

168

Creating a Mood
Hours to Rama; a white handkerchief in The War of the Roses; roses and
lace in The Age of Innocence. Beyond his manipulation of the commonplace to extract symbolic meaning, Bass implements methodologies from
avant-garde cinema to reimagine such objects in a formalist play of light,
color, and movement.
Advise and Consent begins with Bass’s logo for the advertising campaign in light gray against a black background: a visual rendition of the
U.S. Capitol’s dome opening up, like a teapot with an attached lid, to
reveal the film’s title underneath.95 For this black-and-white film, Bass
uses all capital, white, sans serif lettering to create a block of type that fits
within the confines of the open dome, indicating to the viewer that the
film will expose the inner workings of Congress—in this case, the Senate.
The logo-title then dissolves to the image of a billowing American flag, its
stripes filling the screen horizontally. The American flag, of course, is associated with a whole array of symbolic meanings, the most obvious being a
signifier for American democracy. Indeed, the film’s narrative revolves
around a corrupt southern senator who leads a personal vendetta against
the president’s nominee for the post of secretary of state, invoking antiCommunist rhetoric to cover up his own impure motives. A moment
later, the shot dissolves to a similar image of the American flag, now filling
the screen above the horizontal axis and leaving room below for the names
of the fourteen principal actors, which appear centered and sequentially
through dissolves. Interestingly, the names are designed in white cursive
typography, almost as if they were signatures, possibly to contrast the government, as represented by the flag, and the individuals who make up that
body. The subsequent credits for supporting actors are in sans serif type in
columns at screen right, as are all the later technical credits, which switch
from screen left to right to top; the major behind-the-scenes credits for
music, production design, and cinematography are again in cursive type at
center screen. Meanwhile, the stripes of the flag dissolve to screen left,
then right, then bottom, always leaving room on the opposite side for the
white credits. The penultimate credit dissolves to a black image with the
Advise and Consent logo at center frame, which opens to reveal Otto
Preminger’s credit as producer and director (another little Bass visual
joke).
Given that the film is in black and white, the question arises why Bass
chose to show only the stripes of the flag and not the blue field and stars.
One explanation may have to do with the fact that the flag’s stripes repre-

169

SAUL BASS
sent the original thirteen colonies, the blue field represents the president,
and the stars the present states in the Union. Bass and Preminger may
have wanted to indicate that the film tells a story about the representatives
of the states, rather than the national government. The colors in the flag
did not carry any symbolic meaning when the flag was first created in
1777. Only with the adoption of the “Great Seal” in 1782 did the colors
red, white, and blue become imbued with specific symbolic meaning:
“White signifies purity and innocence, Red, hardiness & valor, and Blue,
the color of the Chief signifies vigilance, perseverance & justice.”96 In
light of these symbolic associations, Bass’s use of only “red” and white
stripes may be seen as an ironic comment on the Senate, since the subsequent narrative illustrates a total lack of purity, innocence, hardiness, or
valor among its elected members.
Alternatively, the image of the American flag billowing in an invisible
wind from one credit to the next, the view of the flag changing to make
room for new credits but also indicating the passage of time, may in fact
signify that the institution of American democracy will persevere through
internal and external crises. Similarly, the flag survived the Battle of Baltimore during the War of 1812, still waving over Fort McHenry the morning after and inspiring Francis Scott Key to write “The Star-Spangled
Banner.” In fact, the image of the flag waving in the wind cannot help but
conjure up associations with the national anthem, patriotism, and the longevity of American democracy. Indeed, Preminger’s film ends with the
senator’s retirement after the final vote of confirmation, the implication
being that the business of the government and democracy will continue
the next day.
Not the American flag but a timepiece is at the center of the credits for
Mark Robson’s Nine Hours to Rama, which visualizes nine hours in the
life of the assassin of Mahatma Gandhi. Bass in fact discusses the Nine
Hours to Rama titles in Bass on Titles, expressing the desire that audiences
see ordinary, everyday objects in a new light. The film’s complex plot
revolves around preparations for Gandhi’s murder, on the one hand, and
a race against time as a police inspector tries to prevent the assassination
attempt, on the other hand. Bass’s titles focus on the outer and inner
workings of a pocket watch, which is actually seen in the film, allowing
him to create suspense by zeroing in on the element of time. From the
very start, Bass’s titles are a moving-image documentation of a finely

170

Creating a Mood
tuned instrument made by human hands, structured as a visual symphony.
Referencing similar visual works in the style of Neue Sachlichkeit, the titles
can also be read as a formal study of color, movement, and time. In fact,
it is camera vision—presenting a view made possible only by camera
optics—that allows the audience to see the everyday anew. Photography,
which highlights the beauty of modern technology, had its precedents in
the work of German New Realists in the 1920s and American photographers such as Paul Strand. But Bass ratchets up the emotions by throwing
Expressionist lighting and strong emotional colors into the mix, creating
a sense of anticipation as the clock ticks.
As early as October 1961, Robson hired Bass to design a logo for the
film’s ad campaign and the cover of the paperback version of Stanley Wolpert’s novel (published in 1963), as well as the titles. By January 1962,
Bass had designed a preproduction poster, which he signed but does not
correspond to the Bass gallery version. Meanwhile, filming in India had
been completed, and studio production was about to commence at the
MGM studios at Elstree, England.97 Designer Dave Nagata handled most
of the work on the Nine Hours to Rama titles. The film premiered a year
later, on 21 February 1963, in London. Again, reviewers went out of
their way to mention and praise Bass’s titles, including James Powers at
the Hollywood Reporter, Harrison Carroll at the Los Angeles Herald Examiner, Philip K. Scheuer of the Los Angeles Times, and the reviewer for Variety. Most effusively, Raymond Levy wrote in Motion Picture Herald: “Saul
Bass has effected one of his most unique jobs of establishing a mood in his
backgrounds to the credit cards—a motif of the time element mounting
in intensity and excitement before the story opens.”98 Many reviewers
hated the film, even if they liked the titles, including this acidic British
critic: “What strengthens Mr. Bass’ claims on our attention is, of course,
the rueful fact that his little inventions so frequently pulse on in the memory when the works they set out to preface have quite, quite faded. And
certainly nothing so becomes dreadful NINE HOURS as its inception, a
Bass magnification of the clicking, lunging innards of a clock. After this
vibrant stuff, suspense curls up and dies.”99
Interestingly, the titles open with a Gandhi quote and the standard
historical disclaimer (which is usually found near the back of the titles) in
white block type, while two purple-red letters in Sanskrit fill the center of
the black screen. That text is replaced by a block of red text in Hindi,
which then dissolves to one line of large Hindi text filling the bottom half

171

SAUL BASS
of the screen below the horizontal axis. The above-the-title credits appear
in white sans serif caps.
The film’s title is centered just above the horizontal axis on a black
background, while the top half of a red-tinted stopwatch creates a
180-degree arch directly below the title. The camera then begins a slow
zoom into the exact center of the watch’s face, until the screen is completely red; white credits for the supporting actors fade in and out in a
column at screen left. Bass lights the watch from the right side, so that the
hands and the center peg throw deep shadows onto the watch’s face, multiplying the moving parts in the image. The camera then cuts to a microscopic close-up of the tip of the minute hand moving slowly toward twelve
o’clock and, finally, to an even closer shot as the credits for the principal
behind-the-camera talent appear on the horizontal axis. The next twelve
shots present microscopic views of the pocket watch’s mechanical movement—its springs and gears. The one-minute sequence is photographed
in high key lighting, so the yellow-brown parts appear and disappear out
of the surrounding darkness, while the major and technical credits continue. The final five shots of the title sequence return to the face of the
watch. The last image is of a small round dial within the larger watch face,
with the director’s credit dissolving in a perfectly matched cut to the
wheel of a steam engine as the narrative commences.
If the watch measures and signifies time, it does so through the movement of its constituent parts. Indeed, time can be visualized in film only
through movement—that is, action. Technically, the microphotography
of the sequence would be simple in the digital era, but given that these
images are analog, they are nothing short of extraordinary. Utilizing a
design concept similar to Moholy-Nagy’s A Lightplay: Black, White, Grey
(1930), in which the moving parts of a machine reflect abstract light patterns, Bass’s central montage of the watch’s movement can be mistaken
for an abstract avant-garde film. In particular, the play of shadows, as the
tiny second hand steadily makes its 360-degree journey and the camera
moves ever closer to the watch’s face, recalls abstract avant-garde films
from the 1920s. And like many New Realist photographers in the 1920s,
Bass celebrates the beauty of technology, the precision of the watch works,
just as Ralph Steiner did in Mechanical Principles (1930) or Paul Strand
did in his Akeley camera series. In keeping with the Bass style, the designer
also limits his color palette to reds, dark yellows, and blacks, accentuating
the dark, foreboding quality of the visuals. Time stops for no one, so the

172

Creating a Mood
movement also communicates a sense of the inevitability of fate and the
assassin’s bullet.
Unlike the body of the film, which utilizes music composed by Englishman Malcolm Arnold, Bass chooses authentic Indian music. The element of time is thus first measured by sound, not images; the beat of the
tabla and sitar marks time as the first title appears. The heavily rhythmic
Indian music only intensifies the acute sense of the passage of time
expressed in the images. Simultaneously, the use of Indian music not only
foreshadows the film’s narrative but also adds another exotic element to
the visuals, since such music would have been alien to most Western audiences in 1963 (i.e., before the counterculture and before the Beatles discovered Ravi Shankar).
Bass’s ability to manipulate an ordinary object and make it strange reached
new heights with his titles for Danny DeVito’s The War of the Roses (1989).
Here, a seemingly white landscape is revealed to be nothing more than a
handkerchief. The concept for the titles was Saul’s, although both he and
Elaine are credited.100 The titles open on a gray screen with wisps of light
moving in undefined patterns over the screen as we see the above-the-title
credits, including those of the three principal actors: Michael Douglas,
Kathleen Turner, and Danny DeVito. That background continues as a
single red rose and a long green stem underline the title shot. As the supporting actor credits fade in and out, the highlights become more defined,
forming a landscape that seems to have ridges and valleys, while the camera continuously tracks to the right. As the major behind-the-camera
credits appear, the focus becomes even sharper on the background; the
light and shadow landscape now appears to have a definite texture, forming half-circle patterns. For once, Bass employs black typography rather
than white, but true to his style, all the letters are sans serif capitals; the
narrow font is atypical of Bass’s earlier title work and may reflect Elaine’s
influence. The typography with the credits centered on the horizontal axis
is extremely elegant, as is the discreet gray-white background. However,
contrary to the Bass style, which usually avoids diagonal lines, the light
forms diagonals that roll gently around the typography. The sequence
ends with a typical visual joke when the camera pulls back to reveal that
the white and gray background is actually a handkerchief, into which the
film’s narrator, played by Danny DeVito, blows his nose. This led the
critic for the Nation to write of the film: “The high point of The War of

173

SAUL BASS
the Roses is the title sequence, directed by Elaine and Saul Bass. The camera peers and pokes through the folds of a snow-white fabric, at last revealing it to be a handkerchief. Then comes the first scene, in which the
director of the rest of the film, Danny DeVito, puts the handkerchief to
use, in effect smearing snot all over the audience—which is pretty much
what he does for the following two hours as well.”101
Given that the film is a vicious satire of Hollywood romantic comedies—a couple meet, fall in love, fall out of love, and then wage a relentless war against each other—such a reading is not without merit. Another
critic saw the titles as visual echoes of an all-white wedding: “Visually, we
could be looking at a variety of things: the train to a wedding dress, clean
linen sheets signifying the unpolluted slate of a new life together, or the
black titles as place cards over a tablecloth.”102 Such readings emphasize
the irony of the difference between romantic notions of marriage in Hollywood films and the reality of most American marriages, which end in
divorce at least as often as in “happily ever after.” Both critics, however,
miss the important element of the moving camera, which seemingly dollies from left to right on its own horizontal axis, as if traveling through a
white landscape of snow or sand. In fact, some of the background images
could be mistaken for the sand dunes of a desert landscape.
The title sequence was in fact shot by having the camera track along
an extremely long, unbroken bolt of white cloth that had been tastefully
crumpled to give it the texture of a landscape. Conceptually, the design
can be compared to Bass’s earlier titles for Alcoa Premiere, in that camera
movement rather than editing allows a vacillating perception between the
concrete and the abstract. Here, the titles become a visual metaphor for
the Roses’ cold and barren marriage, the diagonals indicating a kind of
movement without movement; their marriage is indeed on the rocks,
despite the red rose underlining the film’s title, which is usually associated
with romantic love. Whatever the interpretation, Bass’s title sequence for
The War of the Roses and its closing joke depend on initially misperceiving
an ordinary object: a white handkerchief.
Elegant (but without a distasteful joke at the end) also describes Bass’s
titles for Martin Scorsese’s The Age of Innocence (1993). Based on Edith
Wharton’s 1920 Pulitzer Prize–winning novel of fin de siècle upper-class
New York society, The Age of Innocence depicts an unhappy love affair
between two people who cannot marry because of the rigid social conven-

174

Creating a Mood
tions of the American Gilded Age. According to Bass, Scorsese gave him
and Elaine virtually complete freedom: “We would show him a few scribbles and a few storyboard frames and, based on that, we went ahead and
produced it.”103
The credit sequence features a visual symphony of roses blooming
behind a veil of Victorian lace, as the overture to Charles Gounod’s midnineteenth-century opera Faust is heard on the sound track (thus aurally
introducing the opening scene at the Metropolitan Opera). As the music
slowly builds to a crescendo, the roses open ever more furiously, ending
with the image of a dandelion seed head at the moment Scorsese’s directorial credit appears onscreen. It is a perfect metaphor for the eruption of
sexual passion and its end; simultaneously, it reverberates with the director’s Catholicism, connecting the emotional suffering of the protagonists
with the Passion. The dominant colors used in the sequences—from deep
violet to coral pink, red, and purple and finally vivid yellows—signify
intense emotionality. This is underscored by the highly romantic music,
which, in its operatic orchestration, also conveys a sense of melancholy
and unhappiness, especially since the final image in the sequence is seemingly a metaphor for death and decay.
The title sequence begins with a black screen as the first credits for the
production companies appear in a white serif typeface centered on the
horizontal axis. The first above-the-title actor credit for Daniel Day Lewis
is framed above and below by lines of beautifully handwritten calligraphy,
more or less illegible in violet against the black background but possibly
meant to be a reproduction of Wharton’s original manuscript (though her
hand was not quite as elegant) or perhaps a love letter. Following Michelle
Pfeiffer’s credit, the underlying manuscript turns a dark pink before Winona Ryder’s credit fades in and out, indicating that the first two stars will
constitute the narrative’s central romance. Then a coral rose in almost the
same hue as the text fades in and slowly begins to open as the text turns
black and the film’s title appears in white, surrounded by a white ornamental design of interlocking loops. As that rose gives way to a second
rose and then another in red and yellow, the moving images seem to be
photographed through lace, while the supporting actors’ credits appear in
white, screen left, left-justified and then screen right, right-justified. The
major behind-the-scenes credits follow, again on the horizontal axis and
centered, accompanied by ever-larger dissolving images of roses and lace.
Finally, the screen becomes completely red, with small roses visible at the

175

SAUL BASS
bottom of the screen, as the credits for producer, novelist, and scriptwriters appear. As the screen turns dark yellow, with a dandelion seed head
and dark calligraphy replacing the lace, Scorsese’s credit as director fades
exactly perpendicular to the margins of the handwritten text, forming a
cross.
Bass himself called the title design highly metaphoric: “The title was
deliberately ambiguous and metaphorical. The kinds of notions we had in
mind involved an attempt to project the romantic aura of the period and
still signal its submerged sensuality and hidden codes. . . . The continuous
series of long dissolves from flower to flower creates a sensuous overlay to
the notion of Victorian innocence.”104 And indeed, one can interpret the
lace as superficially associated with Victorian society, just as the music
identifies the film’s time and place. The Age of Innocence opens at a Metropolitan Opera performance of Faust, where Gounod’s work had its
American premiere in October 1883, creating an aural continuity with
Bass’s title sequence. It is also possible to interpret the operatic track heard
offscreen, which visualizes Faust’s unnatural pact with the devil to achieve
social success, as an allegory for the hero’s contract with society to gain
status and wealth, despite his libidinal urges and his love for a woman he
can’t have.
Given the film’s narrative of conflict between sexual desire and strict
moral codes, it might be more productive to see the images of roses as
unbridled nature and the intricate lace patterns as a metaphor for the strictures of a rigid class society. Indeed, it is impossible not to interpret the
blooming roses sexually, given the centuries-long tradition of such iconography going back to the Kama Sutra, in which the female organ is represented through flowers. The ever-quickening pace of the opening petals
thus replicates the rhythms of sexual orgasm. Ironically, Scorsese’s film is
much more about the repression of erotic desire than about sexual joy.
Bass was fascinated by the time-lapse cinematography that allowed
him to make the invisible visible, as in the case of a rose opening its petals.
That technology had been discovered shortly after the birth of cinema,
but it was the 1920s avant-garde filmmakers and theorists such as MoholyNagy and Hans Richter who championed time-lapse as a specifically cinematic vision. Bass had used similar shots of flowers blooming in a Rainier
beer commercial in 1966 and, more prominently, in The Searching Eye
(1964). In both cases, flowers represent nature’s beauty and fertility. An
eerily otherworldly blue rose opens its petals in Bass’s original ending for

176

Creating a Mood
Phase IV, expressing the notion that nature has survived but in a different
form since the arrival of the ants. A rose closing its petals marks the transition to “Phase III,” when human life has changed forever. Interestingly,
Bass’s shot of the dandelion seed head in The Age of Innocence is recycled
from Why Man Creates, where it has a completely different semantic
meaning. Whereas the dandelion in Bass’s earlier film designates a fertility
of ideas, in The Age of Innocence it visualizes the death of the flower and
the drying up of desire. Calligraphy replaces lace in this last image, thus
framing the credit sequence and pointing to the literary origins of the
text, but also to the film and its emotional conflicts as narrative.

States of Mind: The Big Knife, The Shrike, Vertigo,
Bunny Lake Is Missing, Seconds
Utilizing images of objets trouvés symbolically, Saul Bass invokes a pars
pro toto strategy to capture a film’s essence in a found object. When dealing with films that are about the psychology of their characters, though,
such a strategy becomes more problematic. How can one reduce complex
emotional or psychological states of mind to a single object? Bass therefore experimented with a variety of conceptual and intellectual solutions
to individual design problems, moving from a kind of documentary realism to symbolic representations to pure abstraction. Nevertheless, he continued to focus on letting parts stand in for the whole when depicting
psychological states of mind. For The Big Knife (1955), Bass presents the
anguished face of an actor in extreme close-up to convey his emotional
conflict. The Shrike (1955) employs blatantly Freudian symbolism for a
story about emotional subjugation. With the credits for Vertigo (1958),
Bass references abstract, experimental film imagery to communicate the
central character’s fear of heights. Bass’s titles for Bunny Lake Is Missing
(1965) invoke playtime in the nursery but also reveal a darker, violent
streak. In Seconds (1966) the distorted camera lens mirrors the central
character’s physical and psychological journey. In each case, concrete
images reference psychological states of mind that cannot be directly
depicted but only implied through imagery.
Although The Big Knife was only Bass’s fifth title sequence, it already
bore the characteristics that would become associated with the Bass brand.
Radio commentator Shirley Thomas said, “I’d like to give special thanks
to Saul Bass for the opening titles of the film. . . . They are wonderfully

177

SAUL BASS
imaginative and immediately establish the mood of the drama.”105 Bass
had been hired by Robert Aldrich, who was producing the film independently and with whom Bass had previously worked on the publicity campaigns for Vera Cruz (1954) and Kiss Me Deadly (1955). The film was
based on Clifford Odets’s play about a mentally fragile actor who is bullied into submission by a Hollywood studio boss. The play starred John
Garfield, was directed by Lee Strasberg, and ran on Broadway at the
National Theatre from February to May 1949. Although Aldrich’s film
adaptation bombed, the film maudit has become a cult classic, owing in
large measure to its anti-Hollywood stance. According to Aldrich, the
character of the studio executive, played by Rod Steiger, was a mixture of
Louis B. Mayer, Jack Warner, and Harry Cohn, none of whom ever forgave Aldrich for his indiscretion and all of whom blacklisted him at their
respective studios.106
The titles for The Big Knife are deceptively simple. After the producers are named in white lettering on a black background, a high-angle
image of Jack Palance’s head and naked shoulders comes into view at the
bottom of the frame. The film’s title then appears centered, just above the
horizontal axis, slicing the very top of the actor’s head, which indistinctly
melds into the black background. After Palance’s starring credit appears
on the same line, the music increases in volume to a sharp, annoying
whine, while the actor moves his hands up to his forehead in a gesture of
anguish and frustration. As more acting and technical credits appear on
the right half of the screen, right-justified, Palance continues to look
down; only his forehead, eyebrows, and nose remain visible, but the features of his face are distorted. After the credit for Clifford Odets, several
white horizontal and vertical lines divide the screen into seven uneven
rectangles; the white lines grow thicker until white fills the screen and the
final credit for Robert Aldrich as producer and director appears in black
lettering.
The image of the naked actor in the title sequence, holding his head
in his hands, clearly indicates that the film is about a tormented and possibly depressed human being. The audience knows this because the codes
of photographic realism indicate that the camera can capture human emotions on a face. Indeed, the cinematic close-up was perfected by Hollywood cameramen to allow the audience to experience and identify with a
character’s emotions, as expressed by the physiognomy. Furthermore, the
actor’s raised arms and hands form a human gesture that is also intelligible

178

Creating a Mood
as a sign of suffering, while the bare shoulders seemingly increase the
character’s vulnerability, since he is naked to the world.
Bass had designed a series of trade advertisements extolling Jack
Palance’s acting talents and featuring a pretty head shot in 1953.107 Bass
had also employed a similar composition and design concept in his trade
advertisements for Stanley Kramer’s Death of a Salesman (1951). There,
Fredric March is shown from a high angle, bringing his hand up to his
eyebrows. The emotion in both is the same: existential angst brought
about by the inability to influence or control their physical existence and
psychological well-being. The Salesman advertisement also includes an
image fractured into five uneven pieces, as does a trade ad for The Racers;
both images indicate a breakup, as does the final image of the Spartacus
titles.
But here, Bass also seems to be playing with various attitudes about
human psychology—in particular, the ability to discover hidden emotions
as expressed in the face. For this purpose, cinematography was much
more useful than photography. The late nineteen century had in fact seen
a flood of scientific treatises on the study of physiognomy, providing exact
descriptions and visual evidence that allowed one to “accurately” trace
human character traits, including criminal behavior.108 Specific facial features, according to such studies, could be read as racial characteristics (a
favorite of anti-Semites) or could be used to predict genetic deficiencies or
behavioral patterns, including alcoholism and criminality. Ironically, if the
eyes are a “window to the soul,” then Bass’s titles for The Big Knife reveal
nothing, because the angle of vision hides Palance’s eyes underneath his
black eyebrows, leaving the audience to ascribe whatever emotions they
wish to the actor’s mysterious facial expression. But if the audience has
any doubts that the character’s anguish will lead to a crack-up, Bass obliterates them by graphically visualizing his mental breakdown with broken
white lines that split the image into distinct pieces. Indeed, just as the
image of Palance disappears before Aldrich’s directorial credit, the character he plays disappears off the stage of life when he commits suicide at the
end of the film.
The Shrike was the third title Bass designed, and the film was so low-tech
that is was considered an indie or avant-garde production. Like the titles
for Carmen Jones and The Seven Year Itch, those for The Shrike were totally
different from anything else being done at the time. Cost-conscious Uni-

179

SAUL BASS
versal produced the film, which was directed by high art–minded José
Ferrer, who had previous ties to the Pulitzer Prize–winning play by Joseph
A. Kramm. When the play premiered on Broadway at the Cort Theatre in
1952, Ferrer served as producer, director, and star,109 while Kramm’s wife,
Isabel Bonner, played the female lead.110 The play broke box-office
records, earning a return on its investment in a mere nine weeks.111 Ferrer
was also attached to film rights, which were bartered between RKO and
Louis B. Mayer before being acquired by Universal’s Aaron Rosenberg.
Judith Anderson and Ida Lupino were considered for the female lead, but
June Allyson eventually won the role.
The play takes place in a mental hospital, where a supposedly brilliant
theatrical director has been institutionalized. As the play’s narrative
reveals, he has been driven there by his shrewish wife. When others are
present, she pretends to be sweet and pliable, but her change in demeanor
is an indication of her extreme manipulation of her husband’s fragile emotions. Jim Downs has attempted suicide with barbiturates, and he might
also be addicted to them, which is why he is locked up. The play alternates
between scenes in the mental hospital and flashbacks of Jim when he was
healthy and “sane.” In the original play, the wife leaves her husband to rot
in the mental ward while she enjoys his wealth, but Universal apparently
decided that June Allyson’s screen persona was incompatible with such
heartlessness, so in the film, the wife brings her husband home to care for
him. Considered highly misogynist in more contemporary readings,112
The Shrike supports the 1950s American stereotype that behind every successful man is a woman—and that woman could be a castrating superhousewife, once Freud’s theories had made their way into the American
bedroom. According to A. H. Weiler in the New York Times, although The
Shrike as a film “warped into a somewhat clinical study of a man terrified
and almost mortally wounded by his unconsciously designing spouse, it
emerges as an uncommonly absorbing and provocative drama.”113
A pair of long metal scissors placed horizontally on a black background in high-key light appears in the first shot. A disembodied female
hand (judging from the fingernails) enters from screen left and grabs the
scissors. A side view of hand and scissors fills the length of the screen on
the central horizontal axis, slicing the surrounding darkness of the frame
in half. The female hand turns the scissors forty-five degrees in order to
cut a white paper band, resembling a grocery store cash register receipt,
entering from the top of the screen like a phallus with José Ferrer’s name

180

Creating a Mood
typed horizontally on it. Another strip with “THE SHRIKE” in Times
New Roman is held at the top of the screen by a different female hand, as
the hand manipulating the scissors slips out of frame left while cutting off
the extremity. The scissors glisten in the high-key light, menacing the
viewer in a lesson learned from Alfred Hitchcock’s playbook. At the same
time, the horizontal scissors, the vertical paper strip at the far right side of
the frame, and the darkness in between them form a Mondrian-like geometric pattern of light and dark lines and rectangles. This composition
remains steady while each new paper strip with additional credits enters
the frame from the top, at least until the scissors complete their work, dismembering the vertical white column as the paper falls out of the frame.
Bass’s title sequence is all about castration. The scissors are a classic
icon in the Freudian psychoanalytic paradigm, making their earliest cinematic appearance in G. W. Pabst’s The Secret of the Soul (1924). There,
they function as fetishes of the fear of castration, as they do in Salvatore
Dali’s dream sequence in Alfred Hitchcock’s Spellbound (1944). In Catholic countries during Mardi Gras, women are allowed to cut off men’s ties
with a pair of scissors, a folk tradition that again plays out the castration
scenario. The snipping of each credit by female hands mirrors each souldefeating comment Anne Downs hurls at her husband’s damaged psyche,
but it is also understood as a manifestation of his fear of castration. Bass
thus employs classic Freudian iconography, which he assumes to be common cultural currency in 1950s America. The joke lasts for 1:45 minutes,
with the directorial credit being slashed in a more violent flurry of cuts,
just as the theater director will be destroyed by his own wife.
But one wonders whether the title sequence is also a metaphor for the
studio’s censorship of the original play, as evidenced by the altered ending. The title image resembles in striking detail other culturally circulated
images of a pair of scissors cutting celluloid filmstrips as a metaphor for
the censorship process. For example, the cover of Murray Schumach’s
study of film censorship, The Face on the Cutting Room Floor, features a
pair of scissors cutting through a strip of 35mm film.114 Bass later admitted that he didn’t like the sequence, possible because its Freudian metaphor was a bit too obvious.115
Vertigo is considered Alfred Hitchcock’s masterpiece and the greatest film
of all time, according to the British Film Institute’s 2012 poll of film critics (Psycho is tied at number 34, and North by Northwest is number 53).116

181

SAUL BASS
These BFI polls, taken every ten years since 1952, are indicative of contemporary aesthetic value. Vertigo unseated Orson Welles’s Citizen Kane,
which had been number 1 since the original poll. Yet Vertigo was not even
in the top ten until 1982; it moved up to fourth place in 1992 and second
in 2002, largely due to the general critical reevaluation of Hitchcock since
his death in 1980. Although Bass made some brilliant titles for some
mediocre films, in the case of Vertigo, his titles are a symbolic microcosm
of Hitchcock’s multitextured film as a whole. Color design, imagery, and
the computer-generated spiral design translate Hitchcock’s obsessions
into both avant-garde abstraction (i.e., cinema pur) and iconic imagery of
vision—both elements of the Bass brand, even though the typography for
the above-title credits and the title deviates from this usual style.
At the same time, Bass was designing equally abstract titles for Otto
Preminger’s Porgy and Bess. Those titles were never used and probably
never moved beyond the testing stage; however, the surviving footage,
sans actual graphic titles, is a riot of abstract color footage. Not surprisingly, Preminger chose a different route, and John Whitney, who probably
worked with Bass on the project, got involved in Vertigo, creating the electronic spirals for the title sequence.117 Whitney would also help Bass on the
opening titles for the Bob Hope and Dinah Shore television shows.118
Vertigo was a much better fit for Bass’s own avant-garde ambitions.119
Indeed, the Lissajous mathematical light form at the center of the credit
sequence, doubling as Vertigo’s logo, is at the core of the film’s visual
design. Bass relates how he got the idea to use the spiral design: “I wanted
to achieve that very particular state of unsettledness associated with vertigo and also a mood of mystery. I sought to do this by juxtaposing
images of eyes with moving images of intense beauty. I used Lissajous
figures, devised by a French mathematician in the nineteenth century to
express mathematical formulae, which I had fallen in love with several
years earlier. You could say I was obsessed with them for a while—so I
knew a little of what Hitch was driving at. I wanted to express the
mood of this film about love and obsession.”120
As Donald Spoto notes, the spirals, as abstract visualizations of vertigo, found their objective correlative in “the winding Staircase of the bell
tower at the Mission, Carlotta Valdes’ single lock of spiraling dark hair . . .
the spiraling journey of the two cars on San Francisco’s hilly streets . . . the
camera spiraling around Judy as she composes a letter to Scottie.”121 The
idea to connect spiral shapes to a fear of falling may have come from O.

182

Creating a Mood
Firle’s photograph “Elevator Shaft” (1928), reprinted in Moholy-Nagy’s
The New Vision.122 Spoto’s observation gains credence in light of Bass’s
Vertigo poster, in which a male figure is depicted falling into the vortex of
the spiral. Bass’s own after-the-fact description also reads the title rather
one-dimensionally: “Vertigo is a sense of dizziness (the tendency towards
dizziness), usually associated with heights. The manifestation of this affliction in the life of the main character is a pivotal element in the story of this
film. The introductory credits attempt to recreate this feeling in symbolic,
abstract terms.”123 In the first important reevaluation of Hitchcock’s
work, Robin Wood not only identifies Vertigo as the director’s most perfect masterpiece but also points to the importance of Saul Bass’s titles,
particularly the close-up of the face and eyes. This introduces an important theme in the film, namely, “the inscrutability of appearances: the
impossibility of knowing what goes on behind the mask.”124 Furthermore, Wood discusses Hitchcock’s attraction-repulsion complex toward
beautiful women, who are unknowable because of the masks they hide
behind, just as Bass focuses on the face as a mask. But there is also a confluence of much richer imagery at work here, giving the title sequence its
own mysterious, intellectual depth.
The titles begin with a color close-up shot of Kim Novak’s mouth, left
cheek, and nose. The unconventional framing of the photograph, revealing only half a face, could be a direct reference to the cover photo of Franz
Roh and Jan Tschichold’s 1929 book Foto-Auge, Photo-Eye, Oeil et
Photo.125 Bass then pans and zooms the camera, holding his frame on the
woman’s mouth, eyes, and left eye, respectively, for the above-the-title
credits for Jimmy Stewart, Kim Novak, and Alfred Hitchcock. The reframing of each shot, as the camera momentarily comes to rest before zooming further into the female physiognomy, is consciously artificial and arty,
an almost analytic dissection of female anatomy that suddenly goes blood
red in the last tinted shot, while the film’s title fades in and moves from
background to foreground (Bass would later repeat the red tint on a shot
of Juliette Lewis’s eyes in Cape Fear). Once the title fades out, the camera
zooms in farther; the Lissajous form becomes visible deep in the woman’s
pupil and then grows to fill the screen, repeating the same movement as
the typography for Vertigo. To the audience, however, it also appears as if
the camera is zooming into the darkness of the eye, metaphorically entering the mind. While the spiral changes color and shape, mutating into an
electronic mandala and then back to numerous Lissajous forms, but

183

SAUL BASS
always staying dead center in the frame, the remaining actors’ and technical credits unspool over the animation. In a reverse motion shot, a spiral
shrinks in size, as if receding, and the red-tinted eye returns, now with
Alfred Hitchcock’s director’s credit.
The continuous camera movement in the opening sequence, as well
as the abstract animation that creates the illusion of moving into spaces
that morph into other spaces, represents to the audience a movement into
the psyche of a woman, making manifest the adage that the eye is a window to the soul. This may be a partial explanation for the blood-red tinting, which breaks into the naturalistically colored image like a menstrual
cycle of tidal wave proportions. Bass, of course, loved red because of its
raw emotional power and its high visibility. But doesn’t the red tint also
clearly depict Hitchcock’s phobia: fear of the same cold, aloof, blonde
goddesses he also promotes? The blood-red tint may be an expression of
Hitchcock’s physical abhorrence of female genitalia, as well as of his own
obese form. The unknowable in women is reinforced by the eyes shifting
from left to right as the camera passes over them. The abstract spirals that
emerge from Judy’s inner eye are a visualization of the workings of her
mind, not just a symbol of Scottie’s fear of heights. In their pseudoscientific distribution, such Lissajous forms entered the semantics of psychology in general, becoming metaphors for mental processes. Indeed,
educational films often used simplified graphs to visualize mental processes, and avant-garde cinema, as practiced by Mary Ellen Bute, the
Whitney Brothers, and Jordan Belson, used scientific tools such as the
oscilloscope to create art. These uses supported an audience’s reading of
abstract, moving designs as symbols of brain activity, thoughts, and feelings. Bass liked the Lissajous forms, and he would use them again in Phase
IV, when his desert scientists measure a completely different kind of intelligence, that of ants.
However, just as the film’s central male character is unable to decipher the words and actions of the woman he is infatuated with, in Hitchcock’s most eloquent confession of his own weaknesses, the audience sees
but does not necessarily understand what the spiral patterns mean; they
remain abstract, colorful designs that never coalesce into concrete images
of thought, even though the animation seems to be a roller-coaster ride
through the central nervous system. For the audience, then, there is
another kind of anxiety at work here: fear of being unable to decode the
images in front of them. That anxiety is heightened by the color red,

184

Creating a Mood
which tints a realistic image and turns it into an image of horror and violence—an image of violence against women, just as happens in the film.
Bunny Lake Is Missing marks for Bass yet another foray into Freudian psychology, this time orchestrated by Otto Preminger. Ostensibly a suspense
thriller about the kidnapping of a little girl, the film spends much of its
time questioning the single mother’s sanity. Thus, when her brother is
revealed to be the kidnapper, it is an extreme case of an overdetermined
ending, and the film failed in the United States due to a lack of credibility. Two distinct readings, neither of which is completely cogent, emerge:
it is either the story of a neurotic woman whose child is a figment of her
imagination, compensating for her failed marriage and sexual inadequacies, or it is about an incestuous brother-sister relationship, causing the
jealous sibling to kidnap the child that has come between them. This
structural weakness was never resolved over the film’s six-year gestation
period, despite the fact that no fewer than seven scriptwriters had a hand
in the screenplay.126 Bass designed the paper doll, which became the logo
for the film and the poster, even before the film began shooting in April
1965, as indicated by a trade advertisement.127 Although the film received
mixed reviews, critics again praised Bass for his titles.128 The designer’s
own description of the title sequence is ambiguous, unless one already
knows that the brother is the kidnapper: “The key protagonist in the film
is a deeply emotionally disturbed person who is involved in the disappearance of the child, Bunny. The opening reflects this psychotic state of
mind.”129
The first frame of the credit sequence reveals a disembodied hand that
reaches in from frame right and tears away black paper in the upper lefthand corner to expose a white field with black capital lettering, “OTTO
PREMINGER PRESENTS.” The hand is shot from below with very
high-key light, adding a noirish effect but also replicating the opening
shot of Sparatcus.130 Bass would later attempt to reutilize the same tearaway technique in his titles for the first version of Goodfellas (1991),
unsuccessfully, and for the British television movie Under Suspicion
(1994), successfully; it was also a design element in his poster for Preminger’s Tell Me that You Love Me, Junie Moon (1970) and in a company
logo for Magdalena Productions (1994). The unevenly torn paper is
shaped almost like a dagger, indicating that violence is lurking. The subsequent credits are accompanied by a loud tearing noise on the sound

185

SAUL BASS
track that is vaguely threatening; it overpowers the flutes playing a tune
that might be associated with childhood. In the next shot, the hand
reaches from below and tears off the right side of the frame at roughly the
vertical axis, showing the title in hand-drawn capitals, with the last four
letters of “MISSING” fading to almost white. In this manner, the hand
continues to tear away black paper, entering from either left or right, to
reveal subsequent titles. The uneven white, horizontal field created by the
tears stands in visual opposition to the clean black typography and rightor left-justified credits. Before the final credit, the disembodied hand tears
out a paper doll at the extreme left frame, while Preminger’s producerdirector credit fades in white, just above the horizontal axis. Bass’s trademark surprise ending comes when the hand reappears out of the darkness,
screen right, and tears away the blackness to reveal the opening live-action
scene. This highly self-reflexive moment tells the audience that what follows is only a movie. Bass turns this into a circular device at the end of the
film when a black mask in the shape of the torn paper-doll cutout covers
the live-action image of the mother, now reunited with her daughter, and
the disembodied hand replaces the black paper, creating a black screen
and allowing the end credits to roll.
Who does the hand belong to? Although never completely visible, it
appears to be a male hand. At one level, the credits merely represent a
nursery school activity—making paper dolls. But these are cut, not torn.
Bass is reworking a paper-doll concept he first developed for an invitation
he designed pro bono for Hollywood for SANE in 1960.131 In that earlier
design, the paper-doll chain signified community solidarity, whereas in
Bunny Lake’s ad campaign and titles, the doll is torn from black paper (as
clearly indicated by the shadowing), giving it both the sophistication of
modern art and a “primitive” childlike quality—not the work of a child
but iconographically linked to childhood. The grating sound adds a tinge
of perversity, in keeping with the slightly creepy characters that populate
the film. If the hand belongs to the psychotic brother, the doll may represent his own distorted image of the child as a plaything that can be discarded after playtime, allowing the incestuous pair to continue their love
affair. In such an Oedipal narrative, the child must be eliminated so as not
to disturb the central relationship, however perverted it may be. Such a
reading is supported by the fact that a broken doll brought to the doll
hospital leads to the kidnapper. Conversely, the doll might symbolize an
imaginary child created in the mind of the mother, just as toddlers often

186

Creating a Mood
make up invisible friends to articulate their own desires. Is the imaginary
child the symbolic consummation of the incestuous relationship? Such a
reading is made manifest at the end of the film, when only mother and
daughter are seen cheek to cheek inside the doll shape. The final shot,
then, symbolically takes back the “happy ending,” questioning whether
anything in the film is real. For some critics, such as Andrew Sarris, the
film’s ambiguity was what made it enjoyable.132
With the titles for Seconds, Bass returns to a study of physiognomy, but
this time through a distorted lens—perverted like the science in the film
that promises new identities for old minds and bodies. The plot revolves
around a bored sixty-year-old businessman who hires a corporation to
give him a new body and a new identity, so it stages his death and turns
him into a Malibu-based artist. Thus, the plot takes literally the middleaged desire to start life anew. Working again with John Frankenheimer
(Bass had done the titles for The Young Stranger and Grand Prix), Bass
employs both experimental and horror film techniques in the credits, mirroring Seconds’ own mix of genres—part science fiction, part thriller, part
1960s youth cult film. Indeed, this mix of genres and the film’s extremely
bleak ending led to its box-office failure, although the film has since been
recuperated by film historians as one of the director’s most interesting
works.133 Based on surviving storyboards, Bass’s original designs for the
title sequence used the same visual idea he had developed for the poster
(which was apparently rejected), in which he played with notions of an
old-young Janus face and the making of human copies, as in a printing
press.134 In creating a montage of distorted images of Art Goodman’s
face,135 Bass moved closer to Frankenheimer’s and cinematographer James
Wong Howe’s visual design for the overall film, making liberal use of
handheld cameras, jump cuts, extreme close-ups, first-person point of
view shots, and fish-eye lenses. Working with Howard Anderson Opticals
and Art Goodman, Bass shot footage that was then projected via a rearprocess projector onto an aluminum plate, which could be bent to create
visual distortions.136
The titles begin with a completely abstract, extreme close-up of an
unidentifiable black-and-white object that is seemingly moving around its
own axis. This is revealed to be an eye once the camera comes to rest
(actually, it dissolves to a close-up of an eye), with the black circle of the
pupil dominating the middle of the frame. After Rock Hudson’s sans serif

187

SAUL BASS
credit appears in white capitals and disappears screen right, the lens again
stretches the image, similar to a fun-house mirror.137 Alienating, atonal
electronic music accompanies the image as the eyeball splits into two parts
and is rejoined in the convex lens before Frankenheimer’s above-the-title
credit fades in, followed by a dissolve to a dark, out-of-focus orifice—a
mouth—as the title appears in the center of the frame. The camera continues to zoom in on the mouth and teeth, which then dissolve into a
series of images in which the lips and facial features are seemingly multiplied in (invisible) split-screen montages as the actors’ credits fade in, leftjustified at screen left. Subsequent shots focus on the nose and then
Goodman’s face, but they are shot from an extremely low angle, from
under the chin. Either the camera seemingly zooms in on various orifices
or the image is stretched or contracted in the mirror, becoming an abstract
play of black, gray, and white shadows. The final horrific image before
Frankenheimer’s directorial credit consists of the face under a surgical
mask, cutting to a close-up shot of the hole where the mouth should be
as “directed by JOHN FRANKENHEIMER” fades in (an image strangely
reminiscent of Bass’s 1962 commercial for Mennen Baby Magic).
Given that the film is about plastic surgery and the creation of new
identities, Bass’s decision to visually explore a man’s physiognomy in a
way that is both unsettling and mysterious seems appropriate. The camera
is like an instrument probing various facial orifices, and the film is about
the invasion of the body by medicine; however, the image distortions
indicate that there is something unhealthy about this particular brand of
medicine. The subject seems to understand this, because in one shot the
eye darts back and forth in fear, just as the final shot of the white cotton
mask instills in the audience an apprehension about what is to come. The
split-screen shots multiply certain lines on the face, indicating that the
attached body is rather old. Utilizing black-and-white film stock also
emphasizes abstraction, making it more difficult for the audience to
decode the indexical content of the images and thus further unsettling
them. Finally, the camera distortions undermine the usual montage process, which allows the viewer to construct an image of the human face
from separate close-up shots. As a result, any exploration of human psychology through the study of photographic physiognomy (as in The Big
Knife) is impossible.
The film that follows demonstrates the replacement of an old face
with a new face and body and even the transition to a new physical iden-

188

Creating a Mood
tity, but nothing can change the thoughts of the mind within. The final
two images of the mask can thus be read as occurring either after the subject’s first operation, when he receives his new face, or before his second
operation (i.e., as a death mask), when his body will be given to a new client. Ironically, no contemporary or modern critics have posited that the
film may be an allegory for spiritual, religious, and psychological self-help
cults such as Esalen, all of which promised youth, peace, and happiness for
those who were willing to give up their previous lives and accept new
identities. Ironically, Bass himself would be involved with Esalen in the
1970s, lecturing at its Big Sur campus.
As these examples demonstrate, Saul Bass had a particular genius for creating title sequences from images of everyday objects, inviting audiences
to look beyond their ordinary meanings and find beauty in their form or
in their uncommon symbolic meanings. Whether referencing events,
physical facts, or psychological states of mind, Bass almost always found
concrete images that could represent more complex issues, just as his
logos symbolically captured whole films. The fact that he returned to this
strategy of utilizing parts for the whole throughout his career indicates
how productive this design aesthetic could be in the creation of advertising campaigns and title sequences. A pars pro toto aesthetic would also play
a significant role in Bass’s almost obsessive use of body parts in all his
design work.

189

4

Modernism’s
Multiplicity of Views
If one important conceptual strategy for Saul Bass’s design work was pars
pro toto (finding a single image to stand for the whole), then another strategy he developed early on was creating wholes out of many individual
parts. Photomontages were important in the Bauhaus, with MoholyNagy creating some of the most striking examples, because they taught
design students about spatial proportions within the frame and the juxtaposition of intellectual content. Bass’s movie advertisements demonstrate
that he was a master at both. Montage on a two-dimensional surface takes
the form of a multiplicity of images often separated into panels on a single
page, as seen in some of his advertising campaigns. Cinematic montage
consists of the editing of individual shots to create a synthetic whole, as in
Bass’s commercials and independent films. Bass also understood the value
of Sergei Eisenstein’s concept of montage as a juxtaposition of images to
create meaning. And in a 1990 interview he discussed Hitchcock’s use of
a shock cut in The Lady Vanishes—open mouth + train whistle = scream—
as the origin of what has become a cliché.1 Eisenstein had similarly differentiated between these two aesthetic strategies, defining one as internal
montage, which involves putting together dynamic elements within the
composition of a single shot, and the other as metric or rhythmic montage, in which different shots are syntactically ordered to create
meaning.2
In contrast to his official biographical narrative, Saul Bass’s interest in
filmmaking surely predated his first official films in the mid-1960s. Even
as a teenager in the 1930s, he attended screenings of Russian films at New
York’s Fifty-Fifth Street Playhouse, including Potemkin (1925) and Mother
(1926); he might have seen early American avant-garde films there as well,

191

SAUL BASS
such as Ralph Steiner’s H2O.3 Apart from his growing experience in producing title sequences, Bass’s cinematic thinking began to invade his design
work as early as the 1950s. His design for a trade advertisement for Magnificent Obsession (1954) slices an ostensibly moving image (painted by Al
Kallis) of a couple kissing into four slightly different rectangular panels,
each panel resembling a frame from a film, allowing the consumer to “see”
the action move forward toward the kiss. A 1955 trade advertisement for
producer Benedict Bogeaus’s Pearl of the South Pacific consists of five
oblong panels, each featuring a different “close-up” to visualize audience
reaction to the film—shaking hands (male and female), holding hands
(same), high-heeled female legs upended, a woman’s surprised profile, an
elegantly gloved feminine hand—while below the text box a South Seas
statue refers to the film.4 In both cases, the text between the images and
the design encourage a syntactical reading from top to bottom (i.e., from
left to right), as if they were frames of a film. Ironically, the visual information in the latter ad—the upscale clothing and jewelry, a statue that might
be found in an art museum—speaks to a sophisticated audience, although
Allan Dwan’s adventure film was geared more toward the Saturday matinee crowd. But Hollywood’s reach has always exceeded its grasp.
Saul Bass quickly developed into a master of montage, cutting
together his title sequences and commercials out of numerous individual
shots whose meaning could be read only through their syntactical juxtaposition. Early on, Bass started working with veteran editor Albert Nalpas, who spent his days at National Screen Service cutting trailers and
then moonlighted for Bass. NSS letterman Harold Adler also worked for
Bass after hours. Like Bass, Nalpas was extremely meticulous. Bass would
select the shots after reviewing rushes, and Nalpas would do a first cut and
fine-tune subsequent edits, based on Bass’s instructions.5 Bass expressed
his feelings about editing in an interview: “I love the editing process,
because it’s a ritualistic kind of thing, a process of which you have complete control. . . . Partly it’s the sensation of craft—I like to run a moviola,
to set up the film, to run it, to stop, to go back, to look; just as some people like to work wood.”6 Even more revealing is his statement about montage at an American Film Institute seminar in 1979, where craft is
supplanted by an intellectual and intuitively visual process: “What I’m saying is that montage editing is in your head, you’re really creating the
thing. The choices are arbitrary.”7
While Bass’s early live-action titles for The Racers, The Big Knife,

192

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
Johnny Concho, and Storm Center consist of essentially single takes over
which the titles are superimposed, beginning with Attack! (1956), Bass
utilized continuity editing, as he would with the titles for Edge of the City
(1957) and subsequent films. Bass’s commercials for National Bohemian
beer (1957) also demonstrate a high degree of sophistication in terms of
their editing, as discussed later. As Bass stated in a television interview: “I
like putting something together out of many individual parts. Like a
mosaic, they eventually all fit together to make a whole.”8
Bass’s understanding of quick-cutting montage was certainly why
Hitchcock hired him to design the shower sequence for Psycho, and it is
the major reason why the sequence has become so famous (even though
Bass did not direct it, as he once stated). The forty-eight storyboard
frames of Bass’s design correspond almost directly to the film as shot and
edited, with only minor tweaks. But if there is any doubt about Bass’s
prowess in cutting together film, one need look no further than his commercial for Mennen Baby Magic (1962), which is a model of Eisensteinian montage, a symphony of baby body parts that avoids showing a
whole baby within a single frame.
Bass was apparently fascinated by body parts, and they pervade his
design work and films. Conforming to Eisensteinian montage theory,
Bass uses images of individual body parts to either create dynamic conflict
within a single frame or to give the impression of a synthetic whole. There
are numerous examples of disembodied body parts in the work of the
Bauhaus. Indeed, Bauhaus photographers attempted to abstract both
objects and bodies in their work, and these exercises were often done with
an eye toward creating advertising photos. For example, in an advertisement titled “Young People: Come to the Bauhaus,” designed by Hannes
Meyer in 1929 (when he was director of the Bauhaus), we see the image
of a disembodied hand. That image encapsulated the Bauhaus educational
model, which focused on hands-on workshops where students could
actively experiment in conjunction with their teachers. At the Bauhaus,
the hand thus became a metaphor for the production of art. But this
hand, like so many of Bass’s hands, is also an action figure. The hand
“walks” toward the viewer, thus following the advice of the slogan: “Come
to the Bauhaus.” The hand is a functional tool, as illustrated by MoholyNagy in a photograph juxtaposing a pair of pliers and a hand gripping an
object.9 The trope of the hand, in particular, is ubiquitous within the Bauhaus and the German avant-garde.

193

SAUL BASS
Emblematic is Lucia Moholy-Nagy’s 1926 photo-portrait of her husband, his open hand stretching toward the camera. For the Bauhaus artists, the hand represented the artist and his craft; for example,
Moholy-Nagy’s “Photogram” (1926) juxtaposes a hand with a paintbrush. Herbert Beyer created a series of surrealistic photomontages utilizing hands and eyes, including “Hands Act” (1932) and “Lonely
Metropolitan” (1932), where disembodied hands function independently
of bodies. Bauhaus student Munio Weintraub (Amos Gitai’s father) made
at least two photographs for a Bauhaus workshop in 1930 that show disembodied hands in action.10 Stella Simon’s film Hände (1928) employs
hands to stage a cinematic ballet, while Albert Viktor Blum’s film Hände
(1928) is a montage of proletarian hands at work.
But in Bass’s work, the disembodied hand, seemingly unconnected to
a human body, appears most often. For example, his aborted titles for
Looking for Mr. Goodbar (1977, Richard Brooks) feature disembodied
female and male hands doing a pas de deux around a candle and glasses of
wine and beer on a bar table.11 Here, as almost everywhere in Bass’s work,
the hands are indexical signs of human action and emotion; they lack the
individuality of hands attached to faces and are generalized, so to speak,
to represent Every(wo)man. Bass had previously done an animated courtship of male and female hands in The Facts of Life. Such hands also turn up
in the following Bass designs: Decision before Dawn (advertisement),
Pabco paint (billboard), The Man with the Golden Arm (credits), Manufacturers National Bank (advertisement), “Let Him Die” (Saturday Evening Post illustrations), Love in the Afternoon (poster), RCA “The Kid”
(commercial), Anatomy of a Murder (credits), Hollywood for SANE
(poster), Spartacus (credits), One, Two, Three (poster), Mennen Baby
Magic (commercial), Exodus (trade advertisements), It’s a Mad, Mad,
Mad, Mad World (credits), The Victors (prologue), Bunny Lake Is Missing
(credits), Facts of Life (credits), In Harm’s Way (poster), Hurry Sundown
(sound-track album cover), Bell Telephone campaign (film), Why Man
Creates (film), Rosebud (poster), Phase IV (film), Brothers (poster), Talk
Radio (poster), Tonkô (poster), and Mr. Saturday Night (credits). I’m sure
there are more.
What attracted Bass to the image of the human hand? Was it his belief
in the creative hand, the hand of the artist, his own sure hand, as in the
case of the Bauhaus? Was this obsessive reworking of hand imagery connected to Art Goodman, who was Bass’s “right-hand man,” drawing with

194

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
his right hand because his left had been rendered useless by a war wound?
Was it the hand of fate or some higher force, as in It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad,
Mad World? Or were these hands simply stand-ins for offscreen characters? Interestingly, what connects almost every Bass image of a disembodied human hand is that they are active—accomplishing a task, reaching
into the frame to influence the action, manipulating the graphic design.
Hands communicate anguish in the face of war in The Victors and send
men to war in In Harm’s Way; hands point accusingly in Decision before
Dawn and protect in Love in the Afternoon (poster); hands rise up in revolt
in Exodus and are raised, voting in unity, in the Bell Telephone film.

Body Parts
Clearly, Bass’s most famous use of body parts was in the logo, poster, and
title sequence for Anatomy of a Murder. The logo became so well known
as part of the Bass brand that the designer successfully stopped Spike Lee
from using a similar image for his film Clockers (1995). Otto Preminger
took immediate action when he first saw Art Sims’s design for the Clockers
poster, and Universal quickly withdrew the image with an apology.12 Ironically, Bass’s first design for the Anatomy of a Murder title sequence
involved a series of straight lines running vertically and horizontally
through the frame, which at first glance looks exactly like the Psycho credits. Preminger apparently rejected the design, leading Bass to resell the
idea thirteen months later to Alfred Hitchcock for Psycho.13 The Psycholike titles seem odd, given that Bass designed the Anatomy poster and
logo before film production began. However, the B-style one-sheet, the
half-sheet, and other foreign poster designs, including the French poster,
show traces of the line design; their strongest visual element is lines slicing
through black-and-white images, another example of montage on a single
page.14 For Anatomy of a Murder, Bass was responsible for designing the
whole collateral package, including trade advertisements, letterhead, invitation to the premiere, album cover, and some of the posters,15 so one
wonders whether he was initially trying to marry the dismembered corpse
with the venetian blind images of Stewart and other principals. Bass’s own
description of the title sequence is of little help here, since it was apparently written after the fact and is purely descriptive: “This film was based
on the symbol (the segmented figure) designed by Saul Bass for use in the
general advertising and promotion of the film. Working within the frame-

195

SAUL BASS
work of a contemporary jazz score by Duke Ellington, a staccato and fragmented style was developed for the title.”16 The word anatomy (originating
from the Greek for “to cut”) has several definitions in the dictionary,
including analysis of phenomena (the title’s meaning), as well as the physical dissection of a body into parts, which may have given Bass the idea.17
Like every other black-and-white Preminger film, the title sequence
for Anatomy of a Murder begins with a monochromatic gray screen on
which “OTTO PREMINGER PRESENTS” appears in white capital letters. The typography is then slowly covered by the legs, arms, head, and
torso of a body that seems to be cut out of rough black paper, and the title
of the film appears in white letters inside the legs and torso of the corpse.
The images are accompanied by Duke Ellington’s jazzy score, which, like
Elmer Bernstein’s music for Man with the Golden Arm, immediately gives
the film a contemporary feel; moreover, the aural entrance of horns,
drums, and saxophones matches the appearance of various body parts,
increasing their shock value. All the body parts then disappear, except for
the head; in a subsequent shot, the head moves from right to left while
enlarging to fill the screen, with James Stewart’s credit appearing inside.
In the next frame, two legs become visible at screen right, followed by the
credits for Lee Remick and Ben Gazzara. For the subsequent actors’ credits, various hands, arms, and legs jut into the frame from the left or the
right; the subsequent major credits are accompanied by a torso and head
combination moving into the frame, followed by more arms. Like the
supporting actors’ credits, the technical credits are placed outside the
body parts; in the latter case, a leg, head, and hand are also sliced into several pieces, entering from the bottom, left, and right. Finally, two outstretched arms move in from the bottom of the image and black out the
whole frame for Preminger’s final credit as producer-director. The final
pair of outstretched arms are almost identical to the arms in the Exodus
poster. The animation for the head title, the stars, and Otto Preminger
were also cut into the film’s original trailer.18
In Anatomy of a Murder, Preminger focuses on a small-town lawyer
(Stewart) from the Upper Peninsula of Michigan who likes fishing more
than legal work. However, he takes the case of a soldier accused of killing
a man, allegedly for raping his wife. Preminger focuses on the mechanics of
the trial and the legal system, including the gathering of evidence, jury
selection, examination and cross-examination, and the importance of finding legal precedents through research. Indeed, Preminger brilliantly ana-

196

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
lyzes the American legal system, similar to the way he dissects the workings
of Congress in Advise and Consent. One can therefore interpret the body
parts as bits of testimony. Like the body, which is never seen as a whole, the
individual bits of testimony make the search for the truth difficult. The
lawyers can either embrace as true or attempt to discredit the various pieces
of testimony. But, as in the trial itself, there is a game of truth and illusion
going on in the titles. On the one hand, all the various body parts, which
have been cut from rough paper, enter from the left or the right, as if coming from either the prosecution or the defense. They are abstractions that
can hardly be mistaken for real bodies. Indeed, as with Bass’s poster, the
corpse is a modern art construction, decidedly graphic and two-dimensional. On the other hand, the legs are dragged out of frame, as if they are
attached to real bodies, while the hands and arms actively push credits out
of frame, again, as if being manipulated by a real body, emphasizing the
real–not real dichotomy that is at the center of the drama.
Likewise, Bass’s title sequence for Spartacus begins with an image of
a disembodied hand, but it is the hand of a statue from antiquity. Indeed,
the opening sequence is presented as a series of still lifes of Roman statues.
Bass’s design consists of a montage of statues and credits, similar to Eisenstein’s October and Dziga Vertov’s The Man with the Movie Camera. The
film, based on a novel by blacklisted author Howard Fast and a script by
blacklisted writer Dalton Trumbo (whom Kirk Douglas hired and gave
screen credit to), was originally supposed to be directed by Anthony
Mann, but he was fired after two and a half weeks and replaced by Stanley
Kubrick.19 Bass, who had been hired before production began to do the
titles and design the climactic battle sequence, was one of the few members of the crew to remain after Mann’s departure.20 Although critics such
as Hedda Hopper attacked the film for its alleged Communist inspiration,
and although at $12 million it was one of the most costly films ever produced up to that time, Spartacus eventually became Universal’s biggest
moneymaker when it went into general release in 1962. It was also nominated for six Academy Awards and won four, although Kubrick later disowned the film.21 The reviews were decidedly mixed, due in part to the
market’s oversaturation with sword-and-sandal epics and in part to the
film’s expense. Typical was the review in Monthly Film Bulletin: “It is disappointing therefore to find that despite enormous expenditure, technical
resources and an unusually talented team, so much of Spartacus falls into
the old ruts of cliché and sentiment.”22 In 1991 Spartacus was restored by

197

SAUL BASS
Robert A. Harris, including twenty-three minutes cut from the re-release
in 1967 and fourteen minutes that had been censored, leading to a growing critical recognition of the film as a flawed masterpiece.
Unlike other projects Bass worked on at the time, he produced only
the title sequence for Spartacus and was not responsible for any of the
publicity material. This is clear from the posters, which have far too many
elements. However, Bass was responsible for designing the battle
sequences and therefore received special screen credit as a design consultant, as he had on Psycho, although it is unclear whether Kubrick actually
utilized the Bass storyboards.23
The titles open with a hand pointing left, near center screen but moving slightly to the left, and lit directly from above in a brown light. As a
result, most of the screen remains in darkness, with only the tops of the
thumb and three fingers visible as “BYRNA PRODUCTIONS, INC.”
appears in white capitals on the horizontal axis. Meanwhile, Alex North’s
drum-heavy martial music makes its presence felt on the sound track. A
second clenched hand with the iron bracelet of a slave becomes visible
screen left, while Kirk Douglas’s name appears to the right of the vertical
axis. Next, a statue of a Roman eagle fades in at center screen, behind
Laurence Olivier’s credit, which is replaced by a clay jug in a woman’s
hand for Jean Simmons’s credit; the Charles Laughton and Peter Ustinov
credits are also accompanied by carved stone hands, the latter with the
head of a snake. The last above-the-title credit for John Gavin includes a
hand holding a perpendicular sword just off center, now in a gray-green
tint, the camera panning down the sword’s shaft after the credit fades out.
It is replaced by the head title, a second sword pointing up from the bottom along the vertical axis and forming a cross with the typography.
Another open hand, its palm facing the camera, as if greeting, and a closeup of lips accompany the remaining actors’ credits in columns at screen
left, while Tony Curtis’s credit is seen over two open hands reaching out
to welcome. The major artistic and technical credits are then presented in
blue tints over images of large and small Latin text chiseled into stone,
including Saul Bass’s credit directly under the large roman type “ECXXI”
(from 121). Alex North’s credit includes the back of a Roman head, followed by Kirk Douglas’s executive producer credit, which is accompanied
by a young Roman head with its face half in shadow. Bass then creates
several Janus heads bathed in purple light, through superimpositions,
before cutting to subsequent heads for Edward Lewis’s and Stanley

198

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
Kubrick’s credits, which are also bathed in half light. After Kubrick’s
credit fades out, the statue develops cracks and falls apart as the camera
zooms in on the stone head’s remaining eye socket.
Some have agreed that Elaine Bass may have been responsible for
much of the Spartacus sequence because, at the time, Saul was in Japan at
a design conference.24 However, there is documentation only that she
handled the research and shot some of the artwork at the Norton Simon
Museum. Roman statues for the sequence were found at the Los Angeles
County Museum, the Getty Museum, the Anthropological Museum at
Berkeley, and the Norton Simon, while the Roman fist with shackles and
the final cracked head were manufactured by a local artist from plaster.25
Given that most of the Roman imagery depicts heads and hands, it seems
likely that Bass left instructions and ultimately made all the decisions, just
as he would have if any of his other designers had been assisting him on
the project. As noted earlier, the breakup of the statue is a Bass-branded
formal device, going back to his Death of a Salesman ads. In any case, the
imagery, the typography, and the overall design based on a grid indicate
that the Spartacus title sequence is pure Saul Bass, and possibly one of his
most elegant.
Most striking in the title sequence is the extremely high-key lighting,
so that only parts of the statues are visible. The disembodied heads and
hands seemingly rise up out of darkness, their indistinct contours adding
to their mystery. Their origins, Bass seems to be suggesting, are buried in
the darkness of the past. In addition, the various color tints, going from
flashy browns to gray-green, light baby blue, turquoise blue, purple, and
back to blue, add relief to the images and convey the sense that these statues are very old, but these colors also allow the white typography to stand
out. The 3:38-minute title sequence is divided into three sections: the first
section through the title credit features hands; Latin typography functions
as background for the major and technical credits; and Roman heads
accompany the credits for music, production, and direction. Each section
metaphorically delineates a different aspect of Spartacus’s overall narrative. Yet, despite these narrative elements, the title sequence is very much
a work of graphic art, a montage of static images rather than cinematic
motion—images that are illustrative of actual history and therefore capable of producing knowledge.
The first pair of hands is lit in flesh tones, visualizing the transition
from the real humans in history to their aesthetic representations in stone.

199

SAUL BASS
Each hand and the object it holds represent a character named onscreen:
a hand in shackles for Spartacus, a hand carrying a jug for Varinia, a hand
holding a sword for Julius Caesar. Ustinov’s Batiatus is obviously a villain,
holding a symbolic snake in his hand, while Crassius’s eagle represents
Rome’s patrician past. Typical of Bass, these are hands in action, and here
they begin to define characters and conflicts. Between them all is an
extreme close-up of large, sensuous male lips (harking back to The Young
Stranger), possibly referencing the film’s homoerotic subplot. The second
section consists of lines of Latin text alternating with roman numerals
dominating the screen. The Latin, some of it drawn to appear chiseled in
stone, has been chosen less for content than for design, the typography
and language seemingly strange and remote but also vaguely familiar; we
understand that it is a Roman text. As the great religions teach us, the
word is law, so here the text represents the law, but ironically, there is a
conflict between natural law, represented by Spartacus (and later codified
in the French and American revolutions), and the written (Roman) law at
the heart of the film. The final section is a study in patrician heads, moving
from young to old. Through double exposures, Bass also creates Janus
heads that symbolize Roman patrician society as both noble and doomed
to extinction. The latter idea is also communicated visually by the dark
shadows that split the faces in half. The visual breakup of the final aged
visage is Bass’s interpretation of Karl Marx’s (and Dalton Trumbo’s) dialectical materialism, because the ruling class will inevitably be swept away
by the proletarian masses that Spartacus represents. But one can also read
the three sections as the law mitigating between the hand and the mind,
between the intuitive and the animalistic, the rational and the intellectual,
with language being the crucial civilizing influence. It is a theme Bass
returns to again and again.
The same year Bass completed the Spartacus titles for Kubrick, the
Psycho titles for Hitchcock, and the Exodus titles for Preminger, he also
designed titles for the Norman Panama and Melvin Frank production The
Facts of Life (1960), starring Bob Hope and Lucille Ball. This was the
third film starring Ball and Hope (the others were Fancy Pants and Sorrowful Jones), but it was the first after Ball’s divorce from Desi Arnaz and
the cancellation of their television show. Numerous accidents, including a
nasty fall by Ball, marred the production.26 Frank and Panama had made
a name for themselves as producer-writer-director hyphenates for Bob
Hope and Danny Kaye comedies, and here they attempted to craft a sex

200

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
comedy about married neighbors who fall in love—in other words, a film
about adultery. The film received very good reviews and was nominated
for five Oscars, including best screenplay.
Bass’s titles consist of a live-action sequence in which the illicit lovers
meet at the airport, leading Lucille Ball to reminisce about how a middleaged mom came to be involved in an extramarital affair. Bass then cuts to
the head title and an extended animated sequence for the remaining credits, integrating the typography into a series of visual jokes about love and
courtship. As in the case of It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World, Bass
humorously employs disembodied hands that reach into the image from
offscreen to manipulate the scene. Again, the critics took notice, with one
writing in Limelight: “Saul Bass, who never seems to run out of ideas, gets
the fun off to an early start.”27 The film was a box-office hit.28
The most striking element of the head title is that while the film’s title
is centered in white sans serif letters on a gray background, just above the
horizontal axis, the individual letters are placed slightly askew, each letter
on its own axis. The title is then replaced by daisies in a bunch, followed
by a male hand with stems, which reaches into the frame from screen left
until each stem is attached to a flower. The male hand is withdrawn, and
a female hand comes from screen right to take the bouquet out of the
frame. Next, the male hand reaches in from screen left with a box of chocolates, and the secondary leads are revealed when the female hand removes
the bonbons. The costars are listed between a stack of presents held by the
male, which the female again snatches. The male hand next offers a necklace made up of additional names, which the female grabs and stretches
into a straight line. The names of the scriptwriters appear next to highball
glasses at the bottom, as ice cubes are dropped in; the male and female
hands each grab a glass to make a toast. The male hand lights the female’s
cigarette, creating an associate producer credit in the ash. A black telephone generates notes for the song credits, while a heart-shaped card
presents more major credits. The technical credits are shaped as coats and
suitcases; the latter idea was reused for the Advise and Consent poster and
publicity.29 Bass’s credit for the titles appears on the label of an LP record,
which the male hand puts on a turntable. Finally, the producer credit is
seen on a lamp shade as the male hand turns off the light, followed by the
female hand turning on the light for the director’s credit and the male
turning it off again—a pas de deux before bedtime sex. Bass would rework
the idea of male and female hands at a candlelighted table in a “meat fac-

201

SAUL BASS
tory”—as pickup bars were called in the 1970s—for Looking for Mr. Goodbar. But the manipulation of the image from frames left and right also
recalls the titles for Anatomy of a Murder.
Bass’s title sequence for The Facts of Life humorously depicts the various steps in a typical American courtship ritual, leading to sex if not marriage. As soon as the animated title sequence begins, Eydie Gormé and
Steve Lawrence begin singing the Johnny Mercer title song, which runs
the full length of the titles. The opening title and daisies signal that this is
a comedy, and Bass seemingly eschews the grid design in favor of diagonals. Bass divides the screen into a male space (screen left) and a female
space (screen right), visualizing the objects exchanged between the disembodied hands of the partners. The succession of objects shown onscreen
chronicles the stages of an increasingly serious seduction: flowers, candy,
pearls, boxes of presents, telephone conversations, cigarettes, drinks,
mood music. The coat rack and suitcases, then, mark the transition to the
bedroom, which is represented by a table lamp. The fact that the male
hand turns off the light and the female turns it back on implies that the
woman is still ambivalent about taking the final step and having sex (i.e.,
committing adultery). Indeed, the film’s comedic narrative centers on the
couple’s frustrated attempts to have sex, and it remains unclear—given
that this is 1960, and given Lucille Ball’s reluctance to be perceived as an
adulteress—whether they ever make it into bed. It is also the first time
that Bass was allowed to give himself screen credit on a separate title card,
indicating the designer’s growing visibility as a Hollywood player.

Commercials
By the early 1960s, Bass had gained significant experience as a filmmaker,
not only by editing live-action title sequences for Attack!, The Big Country, and North by Northwest but also through his commercials, such as
those for Speedway 79 gasoline (1955) and National Bohemian beer
(1957). In comparison to filmmakers attached to Madison Avenue ad
agencies such as J. Walter Thompson, Bass made relatively few commercials.30 He hated the hard sell in movie advertising and probably felt the
same about television commercials. According to Al Kallis, who worked
with Bass in the mid-1950s, the designer preferred a gentler approach to
consumers, one that respected their intellectual capabilities and sold lifestyle rather than a specific product. Bass and Kirkham quote the designer:

202

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
“I feel there is more than one way to do a selling job. . . . There is a positive, consistent, coherent way, one that respects the intelligence, good
taste and capacity of an audience.”31 The IBM infomercials of the early
1960s were more to Bass’s liking. A similar strategy operated in From
Here to There and subsequent Bass shorts: they were financed by clients
that did not require the sale of a specific product. Bass preferred to avoid
direct sales pitches in his commercials, but that was hardly possible, given
that their sole purpose is to sell goods and services to consumers.
Commercials had gone through a long apprenticeship on the radio
and were rapidly becoming more sophisticated on television, with a marriage of aural and visual media. There was a move away from live television
commercials, when spots were announced onstage during live television
broadcasts, and toward filmed commercials over which the sponsor had
more control and that could employ more sophisticated forms of communication, other than directly addressing the viewer. Commercials had to
entertain and be memorable if they were going to convince consumers to
purchase a particular product. The sales pitch had to be loud and clear.
Interestingly, some Bass commercials featured the Bass family, almost like
home movies.
Bass’s two commercials for Mennen’s Baby Magic lotion and Mennen’s Genteel Baby Bath soap (1962) are like little cinematic masterpieces, symphonies of baby body parts that owe much to Eisenstein’s concepts of associative montage. Indeed, Bass’s Baby Magic commercial won
the Grand Prize at the Cannes Advertising Film Festival in 1963.32 The
commercial was apparently a family project, and it starred Elaine Bass.
Most striking in comparison to similar commercials from the period,
which usually featured medium shots of a whole baby, Bass’s commercials
consist almost exclusively of images of baby body parts that seem almost
abstract, at least until they are imagined together with other images.
The commercial opens with the camera looking down on a naked
baby, while a heartbeat is heard on the sound track.33 The camera slowly
tracks in closer as very sheer sheets, almost like gauze, are pulled away, one
layer after another. “A baby is born,” says the soft, comforting voice of the
offscreen narrator, followed by the piercing shrill of a baby screaming, cut
against an image of the gaping yaw of the baby’s mouth—a black hole in
the center of the frame, recalling an almost identical shot of Janet Leigh
in the Psycho shower sequence. That somewhat horrific image is onscreen
for less than two seconds, replaced by an image of tiny feet and the narra-

203

SAUL BASS
tor’s soothing voice: “New born.” Other close-ups of the baby’s feet and
hands follow. Then the mother’s face enters the frame to kiss the nape of
the baby’s neck, followed by a close-up of Mennen Baby Magic lotion.
Next we see the mother’s hands take the lotion and rub it on various parts
of the baby’s body, while the narrator calmly assures the consumer that
Mennen’s baby lotion helps replace nature’s own moisture, and the baby
gurgles happily. After Elaine Bass kisses the baby on the cheek, the baby
yawns and her eyes fall closed, while a disembodied hand closes the bottle
of Baby Magic.
This one-minute black-and-white commercial consists of a total of
nineteen different shots. This is striking in itself, given that another contemporary commercial for a Mennen baby product makes do with only a
handful of shots held for a long time—a baby is seen in a home setting,
playing happily in a tub with a crib and other baby accessories in the background.34 In Bass’s commercial, the first shot of the baby lying on a white
sheet is held for twelve seconds as the camera slowly zooms in through the
translucent fabric, as if penetrating layers of skin, thus preparing the viewer
for the narrator’s suggestion that Baby Magic will protect that soft baby
skin. The remaining eighteen shots have an average screen length of three
seconds or less. However, the shots do not seem to be that short because
Bass connects every shot with dissolves rather than straight cuts, except
for a straight cut from the first to the second shot of the gaping mouth
crying. (Ironically, Bass inserts an almost identical image of a gaping
mouth in his title sequence for Seconds.) The dissolves are held for half a
second, giving the impression that the images flow from one to the other
without breaks, while the white of the sheets and the mother’s white hair
band are only barely distinguishable from the gray, amorphous masses of
baby flesh that fill the screen. Each shot taken individually remains an
abstraction, since the images provide no environmental context, no set
design, unlike standard commercials. Dramatically, the baby’s cry alerts
the viewer to danger and the need to protect the baby from harm—a need
fulfilled by the product. After Baby Magic lotion is applied, the baby
sleeps peacefully. Thus, Bass’s commercial pitches a product, but the sell
is as soft as a baby’s bottom. It functions on one level as nothing more
than an abstract play of human baby forms, which, thanks to the soothing
voice of the narrator, communicate security and safety for the child.
Bass’s commercial for Mennen Genteel Baby Bath soap from the
same period utilizes many of the same images from the Baby Magic com-

204

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
mercial and consists of twenty-three images in one minute, thanks to a
shorter opening shot.35 Like the first commercial, a heartbeat and layers of
translucent sheets accompany the image, followed by various baby body
parts. Here, the sixth shot features a crying baby mouth, before the
mother undresses the baby and prepares her bath. A shot of the faucet and
water running horizontally through the frame seems to present the baby’s
point of view, followed by shots of the invisible mother’s hand washing
various parts of the baby’s body. As in the first advertisement, a soothing
male voice and dissolves give the whole sequence a smooth flow, and in
the final images, the baby yawns and falls asleep. As in the first commercial, Bass zooms in on the baby like a microscope focusing on a specimen
(an idea he would use again in Phase IV), then deconstructs the body into
parts without ever putting them back together. It is an Eisensteinian exercise in montage that passes as a commercial. Thus, although these commercials may have been too arty to serve as effective product advertising,
they are brilliant examples of Bass’s ability to edit film abstractly, creating
a mood from many separate images that are connected through formal
composition.
In 1969 Saul Bass was hired by the Mattel Toy Company, and there
are a number of Mattel commercials in the Bass Collection; however, it is
unclear which were directed by Bass.36 The exception is a Mattel Baby
Tenderlove commercial, which features a five-year-old girl with a doll. In
a series of intense close-ups, the girl is shown playing with her baby doll,
sending it down a slide, walking with it, counting fingers that actually
bend, feeding the doll baby food and then a bottle, washing the baby,
combing its hair, and putting it to bed with a good-night kiss. All the
while, the girl is talking to the doll, like a mother chatting with her baby,
until the narrator pipes in, “Baby feels like a real baby, makes you feel like
a real mom.” As in the Mennen commercials, Bass frames his shots in a
series of intense close-ups; the girl is almost always in the center of the
frame, except when the close-ups are of doll parts. A final close-up of a
Band-Aid on the doll’s arm dissolves to Mattel’s red logo. As he did in the
Mennen commercials, Bass removes everything extraneous from view,
focusing on the mother and the baby—or, in this case, on the girl and her
Baby Tenderlove doll. Whereas the Mennen commercials depict a mother’s care for a baby whose response is rudimentary (sleep), Bass’s montage
establishes a relationship between child and doll, as if the latter were
human. Indeed, the Mattel commercial can be seen as a virtual remake of

205

SAUL BASS
the first two Mennen commercials. Finally, until the narrator is heard and
the logo is seen in the final seconds of the one-minute ad, one hardly
knows what product is being advertised. Ironically, commercials that leave
one guessing about the product would become very popular decades later
in American television.
Not surprisingly, then, another commercial Bass made at this time
was not a product advertisement but an image advertisement. Known as
the RCA “The Kid” commercial (1968),37 the sixty-second spot consists
of thirteen separate shots depicting a young boy (played by Jeffrey Bass,
Saul’s youngest son) tying his shoe. Crosscutting between the intense
stares of the toddler in close-up and his efforts to navigate the shoelaces
on his sneakers, the commercial relies on extreme close-ups of both fingers and laces. Again, Bass reduces the audience’s field of vision to subject
and object, seer and seen, as in the Mattel commercial. And like the Mennen commercials, Bass opens with an establishing shot—here, a slow
tracking shot from the boy’s entire body, sitting in front of giant building
blocks, to an extreme close-up of his sneaker. Over the next twelve shots,
Bass depicts the boy’s slow but steady progress as he learns to tie his shoes,
alternating only two shots, reinforcing audience identification through
close-ups of a cute kid with blond hair. In contrast to Baby Tenderlove,
though, “The Kid” is narrated throughout by an adult male voice that
exudes confidence and charisma: “Figuring out all new ways to make
things work. . . . Finding ways to meet his changing needs in every field
from education to medicine. From space to entertainment. This is RCA
today.” RCA is presented as a company with a future because it is dealing
in cutting-edge, modern technologies. The narrator talks about RCA’s
research and development in computers and other communication systems “to make a better world.” But there is also the implication that RCA
will doggedly pursue new avenues of research, will remain open to fresh
ideas, like an innocent child. That idea is reinforced through the dominant narrative of the montage: a boy successfully ties his shoe, which is the
first step on the road to success, as the audience knows when they see the
last close-up of a smile on the child’s face. Experiencing the child’s success
touches the heart of every parent, another core audience for this commercial. And if they are touched, maybe they will trust RCA, whose rainbow
logo fades in over that final smile.
The Mennen and RCA shorts were not the only commercials Bass
produced with children, nor were they the only ones that overtly played

206

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
with cinematic form. In 1962 Bass produced a black-and-white commercial for Band-Aid that employed optical, step-and-repeat printing to visualize children at play. Listed in the Bass Collection as the “Band-Aid—Pogo
Stick” commercial, the thirty-second spot juxtaposes images of children
with images of animated Band-Aids.38 The commercial begins somewhat
perversely, as the camera peers through a chain-link fence onto a school
playground where children are seen; the fence is real, but the playground
is obviously a studio set. Simultaneous zigzag wipes from the left and
right obliterate that image, followed by two shots of a girl on swing and a
boy on a pogo stick. The action of the children is captured in a stroboscopic effect through the experimental step-and-repeat opticals, seemingly breaking down motion into its constituent parts. Bass had first seen
such images as stills in Kepes’s The Language of Vision, particularly his discussion of the representation of movement.39 Six years later, Norman
McLaren would release his avant-garde masterpiece Pas de deux, which
used the same step-and-repeat optical printing process to intensify the
movements of a ballet. The visual effect on film had its precedent in Marcel Duchamp’s Cubist masterpiece Nude Descending a Staircase No. 2
(1912). The shot of the boy on his pogo stick is captured in a split screen,
the other half showing a colorful Band-Aid strip spinning around its own
axis. Next, we see a girl jumping rope through the frame and a boy on
roller skates; the initial movement of the children is multiplied in countless individual images printed within the same frame. After the second pair
of children, Bass inserts a series of shots of Band-Aids with many different
patterns and in various sizes, moving in unison. Here, Bass is employing
stop-motion animation, as if in an Oskar Fischinger avant-garde film
about children playing. Interspersed are different Band-Aid boxes, while
children speak on the sound track, commenting about how pretty their
Band-Aids are. Despite the avant-garde origins of both the step-andrepeat and the stop-motion animation, the two parts of the commercial
don’t necessarily fit together. One could, however, read the first shot
behind the fence as entering into a childhood world of fantasy, with the
animated Band-Aids (injury being a fact of life with kids) and the children’s play each functioning on different, unconnected levels of fantasy,
papering over the fact that Band-Aids are needed in times of crisis and
hurt. In contrast to the other commercials discussed, it is interesting that
Bass eschews close-ups of body parts to visualize the myriad uses of BandAids; instead, he contrasts long shots of wholesome young children

207

SAUL BASS
engaging in exercise and play with close-ups of Band-Aids. So, in effect,
bodies and Band-Aids are the same size onscreen, visually linking activities
that might result in scrapes and bruises and their remedy—an interesting
experiment that may never have actually appeared on television.

Live-Action Montage
Like Otto Preminger, producer-director Robert Aldrich prized his independence from the major Hollywood studios, and his collaboration with
Saul Bass began almost immediately after Aldrich went independent. Bass
was responsible for the advertising campaigns for Aldrich’s second and
third features, Vera Cruz (1954) and Kiss Me Deadly (1955), both of
which were recognized at the time by French critics François Truffaut and
Jean-Luc Godard as masterpieces and are still considered among the most
important American films of the 1950s. For Aldrich’s next film, The Big
Knife (1956), Bass took over duties for the titles and some trade ads,
while apparently leaving the release campaign to others. For Aldrich’s fifth
independent production, Attack! (1956), he hired Bass again to handle
the titles and contribute design elements to the ad campaign, although
Bass received no screen credit.40 The film is based on a 1954 Broadway
play titled Fragile Fox, and United Artists paid Aldrich $22,000 just to
change the name to Attack!
Although not the first film in the Bass canon to do so, Attack! features
an extended live-action sequence before the credits that sets the stage for
the film’s conflict between a World War II platoon leader and his weak
and vacillating company commander, whose failure to support the platoon’s action has led to the death of some of his men. As a result of this
highly dramatic scene, the team of Bass and Aldrich decided to insert the
titles over a live-action sequence that does not move the narrative forward, as later Hollywood title sequences would, but does provide a montage of atmospheric shots of soldiers at rest behind the lines after the heat
of battle. This was not the first time Bass placed live-action footage behind
his titles, but the previous cases (The Shrike, The Racers, The Big Knife)
had involved single, more or less compositionally static shots, whereas
Attack!’s titles consist of a montage of twenty-one separate shots in a twominute sequence. The editing construction bears some analysis for what it
accomplishes in terms of producing meaning and for Bass’s grasp of film
editing, even at this early date. Bass constructed the sequence out of out-

208

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
takes rather than shooting any footage himself, yet he achieves a striking
sense of narrative and compositional unity.41
The title sequence, which is in black and white (as is the film), begins
with the camera panning as the helmet of a fallen soldier rolls down a hill
and comes to rest next to a lone flower. The production company credits
appear in a column at the frame’s extreme left, with each word on its own
line. This highly metaphoric image of death and life alerts the audience (if
the precredit sequence hadn’t already done so) that this will be an antiwar
narrative. As Aldrich formulated it, the film is about “the terribly corrupting influence that war can have on the most normal, average human
beings, and the terrible things it makes them capable of that they wouldn’t
be capable of otherwise.”42 Bass then cuts to a slow zoom on the face of
platoon leader Lieutenant Costa, played by Jack Palance, as his above-thetitle credit appears at extreme right; Bass then cuts back to the helmet
being strafed by machine-gun fire as Eddie Albert’s credit appears screen
left, alluding to the fact that his character (Captain Cooney) is responsible
for the death represented by the helmet. This shot–reverse shot construction continues with another close-up of Costa as he disappears behind a
partially destroyed wall, while the film’s title appears screen right. Bass
then cuts again to the reverse angle, an extreme close-up of the helmet
and flower, as Lee Marvin’s costarring credit is seen. The shot dissolves to
a matched cut from the helmet to a large, round loudspeaker that fills the
frame as swing music blares out. The above-title credits therefore complete the precredit sequence, while transitioning to an after-battle scene in
which all the other credits roll.
As the title sequence continues, the filmmakers intercut shots of Lieutenant Woodruff (William Smithers) as he walks from right to left through
a village with close-ups of soldiers drinking and eating in an open-air
mess. However, just as the pretitle action sequence never reveals the face
of Captain Cooney (only parts of his body), the soldiers also remain faceless (except for Woodruff, who is one of the only characters to survive).
They are depicted by a hand holding a cup, a mess kit resting in a lap,
walking boots, or hands warming themselves at a fire, emphasizing the
anonymity of war, the soldiers’ status as cannon fodder, and the fact that
Cooney’s predicament is a result of corruption in the system rather than
his own individual weakness. Unlike most Hollywood filmmakers, who
tended to deflect political criticism of the system by blaming “one bad
apple,” Aldrich was not one to pull punches when criticizing social

209

SAUL BASS
inequalities and political inadequacies. Furthermore, Bass’s trademark circle motif—the dead soldier’s helmet, the loudspeaker (shown three times),
and finally a shot through a giant wagon wheel—ties the sequence
together but also undergirds the indivisibility of the system (the army)
and its parts (soldiers), as the audience hears a disembodied voice emanating from the speaker. The final frame, with Aldrich’s producer and director credit, is seen over a bird’s-eye view of a military truck in the town
square, possibly a visual joke on the director’s god-like status.
Bass again visually differentiates the credit designations, which are
white, serif, small capital letters, from the names, which are large caps.
The layout of the typography is based on a grid, with the major credits
fading in above or below the central horizontal axis, sometimes in a long,
straight line across the width of the screen. However, there are some
uncharacteristic exceptions. As for the opening production company
credit, Bass inserts an unjustified column of text in a darkened archway at
screen right for cameraman Joseph Biroc, while similarly placing the music
and orchestra credit for Frank Devol inside the loudspeaker from which
the diegetic music blares. In the first case, the placement seems to be
based on legibility, but in the second case, the placement seems at least
partially motivated by the image’s content. The other secondary technical
credits are left-justified; opposite them, Bass places the standard copyright
verbiage, which is right-justified, again conforming to the grid. Thus, the
overall design of the titles conforms to the Bass style, but he expands his
cinematic vocabulary to include the montage of live-action images for
narrative continuity.
Bass’s first titles in a Cinerama film were for It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad,
Mad World, which was shot in Ultra Panavision 70mm. In that film, he
solved the problem of an extremely wide screen, which encompassed
peripheral vision, by using the entire screen as a canvas for his animated
characters and events, as he had for Around the World in 80 Days, shot in
Todd-AO. John Frankenheimer’s Grand Prix (1966) was produced using
the slightly less wide Super Panavision 70mm spherical lens process, which
had an aspect ratio of 2.21:1.43 Bass, who had already created the titles for
Exodus, the second Super Panavision 70mm film ever produced, accommodated the wide screen in Grand Prix by creating multi-image montages that split the screen into as many as sixty-four different frames.
Thanks to his World’s Fair experience in multimedia presentations, Bass
was the ideal candidate to explore the formal capabilities of a wide-screen,

210

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
split-screen technology to undergird the dramatic aims of Frankenheimer’s overall narrative. Interestingly, Grand Prix’s publicists argued
that Bass’s split-screen technique allowed viewers to experience past and
present simultaneously: “Saul Bass has created an innovation in motion
picture main titles for MGM’s Cinerama presentation of the John Frankenheimer film, Grand Prix, with the novel design of special ‘triptych’
effects for the titles. Effect combines parallel action sequences of film
while also permitting simultaneous flash-backs.”44 In fact, Bass was hired
in the summer of 1966 not only to create the titles for Grand Prix but
also to function as a second unit director, designing montages of the
major Formula I races that constitute the film’s background.45
Frankenheimer and producer Edward Lewis first signed a deal with
Cinerama and MGM in November 1964, with Lewis John Carlino tapped
to write the original story. When the production team announced the
same MGM-Cinerama deal almost a year later, Carlino had been jettisoned in favor of a script by Robert Allen Arthur based on Robert Daley’s
novel The Cruel Sport.46 Shooting commenced in May 1966, six weeks
before Bass was brought in for the action sequences.47 According to notes
in the Bass Papers, Bass actually restaged some of the races: “The racing
sequences were shot under the direction of Saul Bass, who subsequently
edited several races, and set the editing style for the remainder of these
sequences. Under the direction of Mr. Bass, nine cameras were used in a
documentary coverage of the actual races at Monte Carlo, Spa, ClermontFerrand, Brands Hatch, Zandvoort, and Monza. He then restaged the
races using the production company’s own fleet of Formula I cars and the
actual drivers from the real races.”48 Bass was involved in other technical
innovations as well. For example, a special high-speed camera developed
for NASA was used to shoot 600,000 feet of negative from inside the Formula I racing cars, capturing the driver’s point of view.49 Both the speeding car shots and the split-screen technology sparked fads in Hollywood,
such as the split-screen scenes in Richard Fleischer’s The Boston Strangler
(1968) and Norman Jewison’s The Thomas Crown Affair (1968), the latter designed by Pablo Ferro, another well-known title designer.
The film premiered on 22 December 1966 at the Hollywood Pacific
Cinerama Dome on Sunset Boulevard and became a hit, earning more
than $1 million in forty-three weeks at that theater alone. The film cost
$8 million to make,50 and Cinerama, as cofinancier, reportedly earned $5
million of the total $20.8 million gross. Indeed, Grand Prix was one of

211

SAUL BASS
the ten highest-grossing films of the year and won three Oscars for technical achievements. The film and Bass’s montages, in particular, received
enthusiastic reviews.51 However, Pauline Kael, who apparently really disliked Bass, wrote the following nasty comment: “After the first few minutes of Grand Prix (MGM), my companion leaned over and said, ‘Now
you know what it’s like to be run over.’ Saul Bass had got hold of heavy
tires and Cinerama: you don’t go to this movie, it comes after you. And
you’re not rid of Bass after the titles, he keeps coming back with montages—little World’s Fair–type documentaries, simple-minded and square,
that pad out the three hours.”52
New York Times critic Bosley Crowther also commented on the
World’s Fair look of the split-screen montages, but much more positively:
“Triple and quadruple panels and even screen-filling checkerboards full of
appropriate and expressive racing-world images hit the viewer with stimulations that optically generate a sort of intoxication with racing.”53 In fact,
Frankenheimer had visited the New York World’s Fair and seen Charles
and Ray Eames’s seventeen-screen slide show titled “Think” in the IBM
Pavilion. Ironically, as happened so often, Bass’s montage work was
praised, while Frankenheimer’s direction of the actors in the off-track
melodrama was derided, a view that persists today.54
Bass’s titles for Grand Prix chronicle the last few minutes before the
beginning of the Grand Prix Formula I race in Monaco. They consist of
more than 100 shots (including split screens, which count as a single shot)
in 4:25 minutes, producing an average shot length of less than three seconds. It is an absolutely breathtaking sequence that captures all the excitement, noise, and anticipation of one of the world’s great auto races. Bass
begins the sequence with a dark screen, listing the above-the-title credits
for the distributor, James Garner, Eva Marie Saint, Yves Montand, and
Toshiro Mifune in very light blue, capital, sans serif letters exactly centered in the wide-screen frame. He then pulls back to reveal that the darkness comes from the inside of a tailpipe, its circular form filling center
screen and encompassing the film’s title. At the moment the tailpipe
becomes visible, the film’s orchestral music is overpowered by the sound
of the engine as the tailpipe image splits into six images. While the following actors’ credits appear center-justified at the horizontal axis, Bass cuts
to extreme close-ups of the Formula I tires rolling into place, shots of the
crowd, and close-ups of mechanics tightening various bolts (which are
again multiplied to thirty-two and sixty-four images in split screen).

212

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
Behind the next set of major credits for music, cinematography, and production design, Bass cuts in more shots of the crowd and more technical
preparations (e.g., measuring tire pressure), as the incessant revving of
engines blows out the sound track. Next we hear the racetrack announcer
identifying the drivers who will become the film’s protagonists, as Bass
intercuts close-up shots of the drivers putting on their helmets, the loudspeakers, and the crowds as the secondary technical credits and the names
of real Formula I racers fade in and out, right-justified on the right half of
the screen. As a French announcer begins the countdown, Bass swiftly
cuts together extreme close-ups of the drivers fixing their gloves; then the
track goes silent, except for a heartbeat, as the drivers put on their goggles
in slow motion and Bass’s credit as “Visual Consultant, Montages and
Titles” appears centered onscreen, followed by credits for screenplay, production, and director.55 Frankenheimer’s credit, also centered, brings
back the engine noise, followed by a final montage of hands at the wheel,
goggles, spectators, stopwatches, the racing official counting down, and
smoking tires.
More than any other title sequence designed by Bass, the credits for
Grand Prix are a technical tour de force, employing rapid editing, split
screens, slow-motion photography, multiple exposures, and montages.
Overall, the title sequence narrative is broken down into three large sections. The first section (1:38) involves moving the cars into place, making
technical preparations, and the drivers getting to their cars. In the second
section, the drivers and their backstories are identified by the diegetic
announcer, who appears in the first shot of this section (1:47). The final
section (1:10) depicts the countdown and the start of the race. Surprisingly, the whole title sequence includes not a single establishing shot or
long shot, except for the last image of the cars crossing the start line.
Indeed, the title sequence is constructed almost exclusively of close-ups
and even extreme close-ups of parts—whether car parts or human body
parts such as heads and hands—the montage rhythmically following the
beat of revving engines as the hands of a stopwatch tick away. Even the
eight shots of the crowd in the sequence are medium shots of heads, so
the audience never gets a sense of the scene as a whole. Many of the
images are so close that it takes a moment to actually read them. Split
screens, which were ostensibly created to present two or more images
simultaneously in time, are utilized here to multiply single close-up shots
of objects, whether tailpipes, bolts, tire caps, RPM gauges, loudspeakers,

213

SAUL BASS
or thumbs in the air. The images are thus defamiliarized, functioning as a
abstract play of light, movement, and color. Given the extreme width of
the Super Panavision screen, the use of close-ups seems counterintuitive.
Filmmakers working in such wide-screen formats tended to prefer vistas
and extreme long shots that remained onscreen for a significant amount
of time, rather than Russian-style montages. However, given Bass’s intention to build suspense and interest in the race from the first frame of the
film, his method of juxtaposing tightly composed shots of very short
duration makes sense, and it worked, because the audience is kept
extremely busy reading the rapid progression of moving images. No wonder the drama off the track seemed lifeless.
Bass and Frankenheimer’s montages in four of the subsequent five
racing sequences are equally impressionistic, attempting not a realistic
documentation of real racing events but rather a cinematic construction
of a fast and dangerous sport. In each, Bass highlights different aspects of
the race. For the Monaco Grand Prix, Bass engages in numerous splitscreen experiments, including utilizing only one-third of the wide-screen
space and then opening wide to fill the frame. Bass’s split screens also
show evidence of many spatial and temporal breaks, indicating that he is
worried not about continuity in space or time but only about continuity
in visual design. With the French Grand Prix, an hour into the film, Bass
focuses on shots of the crowd, especially amateur filmmakers and photographers pointing cameras at Bass’s camera. This level of self-reflexivity is
increased in the race itself, which is presented as a visual symphony. Bass
juxtaposes slow-motion images of cars, multiple exposures, and splitscreen shots dissolving into other split screens, accompanied by symphonic music rather than the roar of engines. The Belgian Grand Prix
sequence, in contrast, features moving camera shots tracking the cars or
subjective shots from inside the cars. When the camera is very low on the
ground, the speed of the vehicles is accentuated, making this sequence all
about the race from the driver’s point of view. Finally, the Dutch Grand
Prix sequences utilize the split-screen technique to create frames of varying sizes while depicting different spaces and persons, whether competing
drivers or their cars’ owners. Thus, Bass’s montages of the various races
are less about furthering the film’s overall narrative or realistically portraying an actual race than about creating highly impressionistic, cinematic
vignettes of the sport of Formula I racing.
If Grand Prix’s titles are all about breaking down a big event like an

214

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
international automobile race into its constituent parts, then Mr. Saturday
Night returns us to a microcosm of the family home. Starring and cowritten and directed by Billy Crystal, Mr. Saturday Night is a fictional biopic
of an over-the-hill entertainer who is now reduced to performing at Jewish retirement homes in the Catskills. Crystal first developed his Buddy
Young Jr. character—a typical borscht-belt comedian in the mold of Alan
King or Milton Berle (known as “Mr. Television”)—on Saturday Night
Live. Buddy Young’s fatal flaw is that he can tell jokes as fast as anyone,
but he doesn’t listen to his audience, insulting them with a kind of brash
ethnic chutzpah that was common among stand-up comics in the 1990s,
when the film was made, but would have alienated 1950s audiences who
were used to white-bread television comedy. Buddy is also an ambitious
bastard who uses people—most of all, his long-suffering brother. For the
titles, Bass again focuses on parts rather than wholes, cutting together
close-up shots of a Jewish mother’s hands preparing a holiday meal (Elaine
Bass played the role, but only her hands are seen) and the empty dishes
remaining after the meal, accompanied by Buddy Young’s nonstop patter
on the soundtrack. His often fecal humor is a subject from the first image,
and this is the most word-heavy title sequence Bass ever created.
Earning less than $14 million at the domestic box office, Mr. Saturday Night was a flop, despite mildly good reviews.56 As one trade industry
analyst noted, “Audiences simply weren’t interested in a film that was
mostly about a testy, cantankerous old man—even if he was played by
Billy Crystal.”57 David Paymer was nominated for a Best Supporting
Actor Oscar in 1992 for his portrayal of Buddy’s brother, Stan, but by
then, the film had died commercially. Interestingly, several critics began
their reviews by praising the titles as a way of pointing out what was
wrong with the film. Reaching back to their own childhoods in the 1930s,
Elaine and Saul Bass re-create a Jewish High Holiday feast heavy on sentimentality. Marilyn Moss describes it most directly in Box Office: “The
camera trolls lovingly over a feast of rich Jewish food: chicken filled with
stuffing, fatty brisket, potatoes swimming in gravy and stuffed kishke. It
all adds up to schmaltz, a perfect metaphor for this film by first time director Crystal.”58 The Wall Street Journal is just as blunt: “It’s all there—
Mom, matzo balls and lots of schmalz, the chicken fat that gives traditional
Jewish cuisine its particular pungency—and it’s [sic] heaviness. The title
sequence—brilliantly designed by Saul and Elaine Bass—makes exactly
this point. The humor, like the food, is delicious and satisfying, and always,

215

SAUL BASS
no matter what’s being served, loaded with schmalz.”59 The New Yorker
likewise mentions “platter after platter of fatty food.”60
Even before the first image, as the production company credits, centered in white letters above the horizontal axis on a dark screen, fade in
and out, Billy Crystal as Buddy Young is heard offscreen—“My mother
was trying to kill us . . . ”—followed by a close-up of a cannonball of
matzo dough plopping onto a wooden kitchen table. The line immediately gets one’s attention and is followed by the punch line: “. . . with fat,”
accompanied by Klezmer music and the young interviewer laughing at
Buddy’s jokes. Over the next two minutes, Bass edits together twentytwo shots of a pair of fleshy, middle-aged female hands preparing matzo
soup; cutting onions and tomatoes; stuffing sausages, chickens, and cabbage; cutting and salting brisket; grinding chopped liver; mashing potatoes with fat; frying latkes; and then serving meat, challah, soup, smoked
fish, stuffed cabbage, noodles, potatoes, apples, and tea.61 Billy Crystal’s
above-the-title credit, the title, and the credits for Paymer and costar Julie
Warner appear centered on the horizontal axis in capital letters, with the
first letter one size larger, over the first and second images of the mother
making matzo. Since the title sequence is essentially a flashback to the
1930s, Bass chooses an old-school serif type. The subsequent acting credits as well as the major behind-the-camera credits fade in and out well
below the horizontal axis, alternating between screen left and right. “Title
Sequence Saul & Elaine Bass” appears over the image of the meat grinder
oozing out chopped liver. The final thirty-five seconds is a continuous
close-up tracking shot moving from left to right (with two “invisible” dissolves) past dinner plates with food remnants, ending on an image of a
still smoking cigar butt in an ashtray, as the producer, writer, and director
credits roll and the comedian discusses his after-dinner performances for
his family.
The title sequence is therefore all about a shared Jewish identity. Just
as the mother’s hands prepare foods that are associated with eastern European Jewish kitchens, Buddy Young gabs and jokes about his family’s
roots in Russia, where “they had no food.” No topic is too bad or too disgusting for the comedian, who turns his father’s premature death into a
joke and lists the bodily functions of certain relatives. The images, meanwhile, have their own zaftig quality, sometimes gross (stuffing a chicken)
and sometimes almost sexual (stuffing sausages). The fact that Bass
chooses to show only the mother’s hands and the objects she touches

216

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
again exemplifies the designer’s pars pro toto aesthetic. Here, close-ups of
ethnic noshes function as a metaphor for Jewish family life and culture.
However, the mother’s lack of individuality also allows her to become a
universal image of the Jewish mother and underlines how the comedian’s
nonstop monologue objectifies his family and keeps the attention on his
own giant ego, just as the film demonstrates how Buddy Young destroys
his relationships with his brother, wife, and daughter.62 Furthermore, the
long track down the empty table, revealing the perfect skeletal remains of
a fish, communicates a sense of emptiness and loss, contrasting with the
comedian’s narrative of his rise to fame from a Brooklyn dinner table to
CBS television in 1956. It is a sequence that contrasts nostalgia and
aggressive humor, the warm colors of the family meal onscreen and the
abrasive narrative of the comedian offscreen. Finally, we see here Bass’s
utilization of two kinds of montage: editing close-up details from shot to
shot to depict the chronological preparation and serving of the holiday
meal, and the internal montage as the camera glides past the culinary ruins
on the table. Such lateral tracks appear fairly infrequently in the Bass
canon, but they are central to the design of his titles for West Side Story,
Alcoa Premiere, and, much later, War of the Roses, as well as this latter portion of Mr. Saturday Night. Since Saul preferred montage, it seems likely
that Elaine was responsible for the long tracking shot, just as she may have
been involved in the War of the Roses titles.

The Solar Film
Sergei Eisenstein and Vsevolod Pudovkin both theorized that editing—
that is, montage, or the physical joining together of shots—is the very
essence of film art, an aesthetic position they developed from the work of
their teacher, Lev Kuleshov. Pudovkin put it most succinctly: “The work
of the director is characterized by thinking in filmic pictures; by imagining
events in that form in which, composed of pieces joined together in a certain sequence, they will appear upon the screen.”63 Saul Bass’s own films—
that is, those he directed—are all the product of an intense editing process;
they are usually constructed out of heterogeneous visual material that
Bass and his editors have given shape through editing. To put it more
directly, Bass, like Eisenstein and Pudovkin, constructed meaning through
the montage of mostly short shots. In fact, Bass almost never included
long takes in his nonfiction films, and even Phase IV and Quest are highly

217

SAUL BASS
edited works. Indeed, the only film in the Bass Collection that has long
scenes with a continuously running video or film camera—other than Bass
on Titles, which has extensive talking-head footage of Bass himself—is The
Party (1975), which in all probability was not directed by Bass. This fifteen-minute film was sponsored by Westinghouse and consists of many
historical personages from the company’s ninety-year existence mingling
at a cocktail party. The Party was produced by Bass, but the small budget
probably caused him to delegate the work.64
Beginning with The Searching Eye, Bass constructs his narratives, his
intellectual threads, by treating images almost like words, developing segments around visual themes and then building up individual segments
into larger montages of images and ideas. Bass preferred montage over
mise-en-scène, to use André Bazin’s theoretical dichotomy between filmic
styles, because, as a designer, he was more comfortable composing twodimensional images than constructing long sequences composed in a
three-dimensional space. Utilizing long takes, which are dependent on
moving actors or information in and out of a space or moving the camera
through a given physical space, requires both a different kind of spatial
thinking and a different composition than Bass was accustomed to as a
designer of print media and even film titles, which tend to be graphic and
flat. The exceptions to this rule are the animated sequences in Bass’s films
and titles, which create the illusion of moving through space and/or time
without cuts. However, even in these cases, it can be argued that, conceptually, a process of montage is at work to communicate complex historical
relations.
The Solar Film certainly conforms to the Bass style in terms of its editing structure, overarching narrative, inclusion of the obligatory animation
sequence, and relationship to its intellectual content. As noted earlier, Bass
preferred film projects funded by sponsors that were more interested in
advocacy or image building than in selling a specific product. Neither From
Here to There nor The Searching Eye overtly references products sold by the
commercial financiers, United Airlines and Eastman Kodak, respectively;
rather, they create consumer interest in activities associated with these
companies. As a result, Bass’s short documentaries are highly episodic
meditations on particular issues, engaging the viewer in an active process
of thinking about the subject at hand. Bass’s rhetorical methodology concentrates on editing together individual images around a specific theme or
concept, then building up larger sequences to construct a narrative.

218

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
Saul Bass’s involvement in The Solar Film project likely began in
December 1977, after he was approached directly by Robert Redford.
However, Redford did not announce that Bass had been hired until September 1978, probably after Bass’s first script had been approved.65 Redford’s participation came about through Consumer Action Now, an
environmental advocacy group founded in 1970 by his then-wife Lola
Redford and Ilene Goldman to disseminate useful information to consumers on environmental issues.66 The earliest film script, dated November 1976, carried the working title “Caging the Sun.” That script, which
Redford himself had a hand in writing, focused exclusively on documenting new solar-powered communities, with a nod to ancient versions such
as Montezuma’s Castle in Arizona and Stonehenge (the only images to
survive in Bass’s version).67 Redford’s production company, Wildwood
Enterprises, produced the film with fifty-fifty financing from philanthropist Norton Simon and Warner Communications, once they had a workable script from Bass. Simon, who owned Hunt-Wesson Foods, Avis, and
Canada Dry, among other companies, also funded the Norton Simon Art
Museum in Pasadena. The documentary had an approved budget of
$317,699 plus a 10 percent contingency fee; this did not include Bass’s
$50,000 fee as coproducer and director or $35,000 in preproduction
costs, which included his $10,000 script honorarium.68 Warner Communications, which had just financed Bass’s Windows (aka Notes on the Popular Arts), also distributed the film theatrically when the National
Association of Theater Owners agreed to screen the short film with Redford’s feature The Electric Horseman (1979, Sydney Pollack).69 The film
was in production from 24 May to 3 September; editing took place in
October, followed by postproduction sound work. Approximately 20 percent of the film’s seventy-one shots or scenes consisted of stock shots.70
The Solar Film premiered at the John F. Kennedy Center in Washington on 17 March 1980 and was subsequently screened in 8,000 theaters
across the country—quite an accomplishment, given that shorts had all
but disappeared from theatrical screens more than a decade before.71 For
Redford, it was important to get the film out to audiences who would not
normally have access to it: “Most of the time, movies like this go on PBS
and speak to a group that already understands the situation. Or it is seen
only by those in the energy trade.”72 The premiere was a star-studded
affair and garnered significant press attention, largely because of Redford’s personal participation. It was subsequently nominated for an Oscar

219

SAUL BASS
in the live-action short film category, even before its official premiere, and
it won several prizes at film festivals.73 More surprising, The Solar Film was
actually reviewed in the press. The Los Angeles Times commented: “There
are inspired moments, others not so inspired.”74 Charles Champlin, also
writing in the Los Angeles Times, liked the film: “Never was so much
urgent information communicated so painlessly, and the encouraging last
note is that progress is being made.”75 Another critic reviewing Academy
Award–nominated shorts took issue with the film: “Bass, who has made
his reputation filming dazzling opening credit sequences for feature films,
has assembled a hodge-podge of solar commercials, animation and dramatic footage into a 12 minute film that confuses more than it elucidates.”76 Stanley Mason in Graphis described The Solar Film as “full to the
brim with stirring and fascinating images.”77
Bass was supposed to earn 30 percent of the net profits, but unfortunately, the film actually lost money for Bass/Yager.78 Apparently, Norton
Simon was disappointed that Warner Brothers had done so little to promote the film.79 Days after the premiere, Sheldon Renan from Pyramid
Films offered to distribute the film nontheatrically, and Pyramid promoted the film tirelessly in the summer of 1980, even though it was still
in theatrical distribution.80 Strangely, Pyramid eventually agreed to let
Warner Brothers distribute to the educational market. In a letter to Pyramid, Michael Britton wrote: “You have authorized him to arrange for distribution of The Solar Film to colleges and schools. We agree with you
that the idea is now to have the film seen by as many people as
possible.”81
Given his own personal obsession with images of the sun and his
growing interest in environmental issues, Bass naturally gravitated to the
subject matter offered by Redford. But Bass also had his doubts about a
film on solar energy; he was not convinced that the technology was viable.
According to a statement by Bass in the film’s official press release: “Elaine
and I did a crash course to find out for ourselves and as we went along, an
interesting thing happened. We began to feel that solar advocacy was not
only valid but important. It added a level of determination, because we
realized how significant it was to really help people understand more
about the subject. It seemed clear to us that a well made film could counteract misinformation. What we learned is that the conventional wisdom—that solar is distant and at best its contribution to our energy needs
would be minimal, is simply not true.” Once he was convinced, Bass

220

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
sought to produce a film that would avoid “a dreary finger pointing
approach,” common to many advocacy and propaganda films, and instead
“encourage people to think more and more about the subject.”82
The original theatrical release was called The Solar Film, but the subsequent nontheatrical release in 16mm was advertised in all publicity as A
Short Film about Solar Energy. There are two apparent differences between
the films: First, the original release was eleven minutes long and included
a “talk show” scene; this scene was excised from the more tightly edited
nine-minute version distributed by Pyramid Films. Second, The Solar Film
credits Saul Bass as director, while the later version adds Elaine to the
credits: “Directed by Elaine & Saul Bass.”83 This was Elaine’s first joint
directorial credit with her husband on any project. Apparently, there were
major differences of opinion between the Basses on the film’s edit. According to Jeff Okun, Elaine changed the whole central section of the film
while Bass was in Japan working on another project. When Bass returned,
Okun showed him the new concept, even though Elaine had given strict
instructions not to do so unless she was there to frame it. The next day,
Bass looked at the footage as if he had never seen it. He then made some
small changes over several weeks to get it back to the way he wanted it.84
According to the production notes for The Solar Film, it was divided
into three parts of approximately equal length. The first part visualizes the
formation and creation of the earth, as well as primitive man’s relationship
to the burning orb in the sky, whether characterized by fear, awe, or insanity. The second part, an animated section produced by Art Goodman and
Herb Klynn, chronicles the Industrial Revolution, theorizing that it was
the result of finding and exploiting new energy sources such as coal, oil,
and natural gas. The third part suggests that the limitless energy of the
sun might be a more sustainable source of energy than coal or oil to meet
future electric power needs. Thus, while the first and last live-action sections mirror each other, both in their visual style and in their focus on
essentially utopian visions of man’s relationship to the sun, the middle
animated section introduces a highly dystopian view of human civilization’s relationship to the earth.85
The first shot in The Solar Film is a signature Bass image: the earth’s
curvature cuts through the center of the fame, starting slightly below the
horizontal axis at the left and ending slightly above it at the right, as the
sun appears as a point of light that grows until the flare fills the frame. Offscreen, a narrator states: “The sun rose on a barren earth, where vast and

221

SAUL BASS
profound changes occurred.” Bass then cuts to rainstorms, shots of microscopic organisms in the sea beginning the evolutionary process, followed
by a montage of leaves and plants. Bass thus opens the film with a montage that suggests the earth’s creation myth as postulated by Darwin, a
sequence he had previously developed in almost identical form in The
Searching Eye. The next segment cuts together images of Neanderthal
man (an actor, shot from an extremely low angle, framed against the sky),
followed by shots of Stonehenge, the Egyptian pyramids, and the Navajo
cliff dwelling called Montezuma’s Castle, as examples of how our ancestors reacted architecturally to the power of the sun. The section ends with
a close-up image of a human hand and a compass drawing the solar system
on graph paper, which forms a bridge to the subsequent animated
sequence. Bass thus achieves a narrative arc from the dawn of time to a
Copernican view of the universe.
A close-up of a barefoot human walking through the forest dissolves
to a shot underground and then to the three-minute animation sequence,
during which the camera moves toward a distant horizon at the top of the
frame, where the sun is rising. A farmer picks up a piece of coal he has dug
from the ground and notes that the stuff burns very well, followed by
hundreds of identical miners throwing the same piece of coal into the
air.86 As the camera tracks forward, the miners are replaced by coal towers
that morph into factories surrounded by houses, and cars and trucks drive
on the roads between the factories. One road stretching to the horizon
dissolves into railroad tracks, as trains fill the horizon. Next, the camera
swoops down on another man who is digging and strikes oil; oil derricks
sprout over the landscape, turning into endless oil refineries. The camera
then tracks an oil pipeline through an agricultural landscape and into a
city, where the pipeline is transformed into a congested highway and cars
suck gas from the pipeline. “Remember the good old days, when we
could just go driving?” the narrator asks, as Bass visualizes the inflation of
fuel prices with a shrinking dollar bill as a magic carpet; its passengers
parachute into a gridlocked city intersection, where other humans converge and fill the screen.
The Solar Film then cuts to a “live” television talk show titled Answers
to the Energy Problem, where a panel of experts that includes politicians,
environmentalists, and academics is formally introduced. The so-called
experts then look around in embarrassed silence, until the moderator cuts
to a commercial break. The joke falls a bit flat, which may be why Bass cut

222

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
the sequence from the nontheatrical version. The final segment begins
with shots of humans enjoying and making use of the sun (to dry laundry,
to make adobe bricks), accompanied by the sound of Mike Oldfield’s
“Tubular Bells,” a popular rock instrumental at the time. Next, Saul Bass
himself speaks on the track: “One thing I really like about solar energy is
that it is really clean, and that we are not at the mercy of those foreign oil
producers.” He then constructs another montage of solar panels on roofs
and the lightbulbs they illuminate, followed by industrial-level solar-panel
energy farms. The final image of a toddler in diapers walking toward the
setting (or rising) red sun was also used for the film’s poster, adding to its
symbolic weight. A roll text appears over the image of the baby:
The sun gave us a world.
It stands ready to give us a future.
Everyone agrees: Solar energy is good.
The problem is, it waits last in line
To receive research and development money.
If we put some economic muscle behind it now,
Solar energy could make a major
Contribution to our energy needs by 1985.
What are we waiting for?87
The three-part segmentation of The Solar Film thus develops the following argument: The sun has always been a life-giving force on earth,
providing the energy to create life itself. When those same life-forms died,
they became the basis for fossil fuels, which created modern civilization
but also contributed to the chaos of unchecked urban development. In
the future, if civilization is to survive, it will have to find more efficient and
cleaner sources of energy, like solar power. However, solar energy research
is massively underfunded at present, and increasing research and development of solar energy sources could have a major effect on the world’s
environment within five years.
Needless to say, thirty-some years later, the film’s utopian vision is
only slightly more real than it was in 1980. Interestingly, unlike today’s
solar power advocates, who contrast the finiteness of fossil fuels to the limitlessness of solar energy, Bass’s argument in The Solar Film is based on
economics: the United States is dependent on foreign oil producers, who
can charge whatever price they wish. In Goodman’s animated sequence,

223

SAUL BASS
there seems to be a sleight of hand, because urban gridlock is presented as
an outcome of unchecked fossil fuel consumption rather than faulty urban
planning. Neither the finite supply of fossil fuels nor their carbon waste is
addressed. According to Bass, “The understanding with the production
company was that it should not be critical of other energy sources but
should take a positive, even joyous approach to the use of solar energy.”88
The argument for the cleanliness of solar energy is made visually,
through the final montage, rather than verbally. Just as the first segment’s
live-action montage is constructed of a limited but carefully composed set
of images, the final segment is a deliberately composed montage in which
not a single image is superfluous and each one makes an intellectual point.
At the same time, the live-action images in the first and third sections are
composed abstractly, as if they were images in an art film rather than a
documentary. Thus, in the first and third sections, Bass repeatedly returns
to compositions that privilege circles, whether the sun itself or solar panels
arranged in circular designs. This communicates that whereas the earth’s
evolution in the first section is a natural progression of life, and the development of solar energy in the third section is in harmony with nature, the
intervening second section chronicles developments that destroy nature
(no circular forms). For example, the film’s opening shot of the sun rising
above the earth’s curved surface has an almost mirror image in the final
sequence: the sun rises above a hilltop, its light (energy) falling on a grove
of ripening peaches, indicating the constancy and consistency of the sun’s
power to give life. The sun is ever present in the lives of humanity, even
when civilization is focused elsewhere (on fossil fuels). The animated
sequence depicts travel through space and time toward a horizon—
forward movement toward the future, the sun, and a more sustainable
environment. This is mirrored in the final image of the toddler waddling
toward that same horizon, signifying that the solar energy industry is in its
infancy and is taking baby steps toward the future. Like a human child,
the solar energy industry needs to be nurtured and protected if it is to
grow and mature into an entity that will be productive for civilization as a
whole.
In conclusion, Saul Bass’s repeated use of images of body parts, particularly hands, originated first in his aesthetic strategy of pars pro toto. He was
always looking for efficient ways to encapsulate ideas and processes in a
single metaphoric image. Moving from graphic designs consisting of sin-

224

Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
gle images, advertisements, or posters to moving-image sequences and
complete film works, Bass intuitively gravitated toward montage as a
method of constructing image sequences that could communicate complex human and environmental processes. Like the Russian Constructivists, Bass saw the film frame not as a window into an unlimited space
beyond the frame but as a discreet graphic unit that could communicate
information through both the composition of a single shot and, more
importantly, the juxtaposition of images in montage sequences. As the
European modernists of the 1920s, including Bauhaus theorists, realized,
fragmenting views into multiple perspectives was particularly conducive to
visualizing the urban environment. And Bass, as a child of New York City,
had a particular affinity for depicting urban spaces, as examined in the
next chapter, even if his move to California resulted in a gradual shift in
his emotional attachment toward natural landscapes, as documented in
his last nonfiction film, The Solar Film.

225

Art Goodman drawing of Bass with his Oscar. (Courtesy of James
Hollander)

Dexter season 8 posters, designed by Ty Mattson. (Courtesy of Ty Mattson)

Saul Bass in Phase IV, original ending. (Courtesy of Paramount Pictures)

Paul Klee’s Flora in the Sand (1927). (© 2013 Artists Rights Society [ARS],
New York)

Poster for One, Two, Three
(1961). (Courtesy of MGM
Media Licensing)

Cover of Gyorgy Kepes’s
The Language of Vision.
(Courtesy of Gyorgy Kepes
estate)

Laszlo Moholy-Nagy’s Vision in Motion (1947).
(© 2013 Artists Rights Society [ARS], New York/
VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn)

Trade advertisement for All About Eve (1950).

Trade advertisement for Hard, Fast, and Beautiful (1951).

Trade advertisement for The Big Country (1958).

Titles for Advise and Consent (1962). (Courtesy of Mrs. Victoria
Preminger)

Titles for Psycho (1960). (Courtesy of Universal Studios)

Titles for Higher Learning (1995). (© 1995 Columbia Pictures Industries,
Inc. All Rights Reserved. Courtesy of Sony Pictures Post Production
Services, Inc.)

Titles for The Pride and the Passion (1957). (Courtesy of MGM
Media Licensing)

Titles for Around the World in 80 Days (1956). (Licensed by: Warner Bros.
Entertainment Inc. All Rights Reserved)

Titles for It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World (1963). (Courtesy of MGM
Media Licensing)

Poster for The Man with the Golden Arm (1955). (Courtesy of Mrs. Victoria
Preminger)

Poster for Judgment at Nuremberg (1961). (Courtesy of MGM Media
Licensing)

Trade advertisement for The Shrike (1955).

Poster for Anatomy of a Murder (1959). (Anatomy of a Murder © 1959,
renewed 1987 Otto Preminger Films, Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Courtesy
of Columbia Pictures)

Mark Rothko, Orange and
Yellow (1956), oil on
canvas. (© 1998 Kate
Rothko Prizel and
Christopher Rothko/
Artists Rights Society
[ARS], New York)

Poster for Saint Joan (1957).
(Courtesy of Mrs. Victoria
Preminger)

Title tests for Porgy and Bess (1959).

Titles for Seconds (1966). (Courtesy of Paramount Pictures Corporation)

Advertisement for Junge Menschen kommt ans Bauhaus (1929). (© 2014
Artists Rights Society [ARS], New York / VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn)

Titles for Anatomy of a Murder (1959). (Anatomy of a
Murder © 1959, renewed 1987 Otto Preminger Films,
Ltd. All Rights Reserved. Courtesy of Columbia
Pictures)

Titles for Spartacus (1960). (Courtesy of Universal Studios)

Television commercial for Mennen baby oil (1962).

Band-Aid commercial (1962).

Titles for North by Northwest (1959). (Licensed by: Warner Bros.
Entertainment Inc. All Rights Reserved)

Titles for Alcoa Premiere (1961).

Opening sequence for West Side Story (1961). (Courtesy of MGM Media
Licensing)

Titles for Something Wild (1961). (Courtesy of Jack Garfein)

Titles for PM East/PM West (1961–1962).

Titles for Casino (1995). (Courtesy of Universal Studios)

Titles for Edge of the City (1957). (Licensed by: Warner Bros. Entertainment
Inc. All Rights Reserved)

Poster for Edge of the City (1957). (Licensed by: Warner Bros.
Entertainment Inc. All Rights Reserved)

Titles for The Cardinal (1963). (Courtesy of Mrs. Victoria Preminger)

Titles for Walk on the Wild Side (1962). (Walk on the Wild Side © 1962,
renewed 1990 Columbia Pictures Industries, Inc. All Rights Reserved.
Courtesy of Columbia Pictures)

Photograph from Moholy-Nagy’s Vision in Motion. (© 2013 Artists Rights
Society [ARS], New York/VG Bild-Kunst, Bonn)

Titles for Cowboy (1958). (Cowboy © 1958, renewed 1986 Columbia
Pictures Industries, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Courtesy of Columbia
Pictures)

Unpublished montage for The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (1962).

Titles for The Victors (1963). (The Victors © 1963, renewed 1991 Columbia
Pictures Industries, Inc. All Rights Reserved. Courtesy of Columbia
Pictures)

Apples and Oranges (1962), animated CBS public relations film.

Still photograph from Phase IV (1974). (Courtesy of Paramount Pictures
Corporation)

5

The Urban Landscape
Saul Bass lived in New York City until 1946, when he was twenty-six years
old. At the time, it was still the most modern urban environment in the
world. Indeed, going back to the turn of the twentieth century, European
and American modernists considered New York the modern city par
excellence. Walt Whitman sang its praises in his poem “Mannahatta,” first
published in the 1860 edition of The Leaves of Grass: “High growths of
iron, slender, strong, splendidly uprising toward clear skies.” Paul Strand,
Alfred Stieglitz, and Alvin Langdon Coburn captured not only the explosion of skyscrapers before World War I but also how the new urban topography changed perceptions of the world in their photographs “Wall
Street” (1910), “Two Towers” (1913), and “The Octopus” (1912),
respectively. Visiting New York for the first time in September 1915, Marcel Duchamp exclaimed, “New York is a work of art, a complete work of
art.”1 Between the world wars, Bernice Abbott’s series of New York photographs, such as “Untitled (New York City)” (1929), and Charles C.
Ebetts’s iconic “Lunch atop a Skyscraper” (1932) continued to document the new vision of the urban landscape. Paul Strand and Charles
Sheeler’s Manhatta (1921), an avant-garde film portrait of the city,
defined the city film genre forever after, privileging the extreme high and
low angles of vision that the vertical thrust of modern architecture forces
on the urban flaneur.2 Russian Constructivist painter Kazimir Malevich’s
1924 photomontage, Architekton in Front of a Skyscraper (Suprematist
Transformation of New York), mixed painting and a photographic image
of Lower Manhattan’s skyscrapers to privilege the extreme vertical and
horizontal grids that are part and parcel of the urban landscape.
New York, especially at night, offered European modernists a phantasmagoric vision of the urban landscape. When Sergei Eisenstein first visited New York in 1931, he exclaimed: “All sense of perspective and of

227

SAUL BASS
realistic depth is washed away by a nocturnal sea of electric advertising.
Far and near, small (in the foreground) and large (in the background),
soaring aloft and dying away, racing and circling, bursting and vanishing—these lights tend to abolish all sense of real space, finally melting into
a single plane of colored light points and neon lines moving over a surface
of black velvet sky.”3 Gyorgy Kepes, too, discovered the unique visual
experience that artificial light affords an urban environment: “Buildings
that were modeled under the sun into a clear sculptural form, under the
simultaneously acting artificial light-sources lose their three-dimensional
quality. Contours are obscured. The light spots, coming from inside and
outside simultaneously, and the fusion of luminosity and chiaroscuro,
break up the solid form as a unit of space.”4 Modernist artists thus picked
up on two ways in which the perception of space changes in an urban
environment: skyscrapers obliterate the horizon, making extreme angle
views up, down, or through buildings necessary; and electric illumination
at night flattens space to create purely abstract forms.
Not surprisingly, cityscapes became a major inspiration for the work
of Saul Bass, yet his depictions of urbanity seem reductionist. In particular, Bass repeatedly favors two visual tropes to signify urban landscapes.
On the one hand, the grid structure in his design work mirrors the perpendicular lines of urban architecture in the twentieth century, just as his
visualization of cities privileges vertical-horizontal movement. On the
other hand, Bass seems to be fascinated by urban nightscapes, with their
perpendicular arrangement of spots of light reducing a city’s architecture
to light spectacles, as seen on Broadway theater marquees. This reduction
of the urban landscape to visual clichés seems inexplicable, given Bass’s
upbringing in the New York megalopolis. One explanation may be that
Bass was never very fond of New York, given his personal associations
with the city: his parents’ unassimilated, Yiddish-speaking home; the family’s poverty after the death of his father; the years of toiling in the movie
advertising business at the bottom of the totem pole. Unlike most New
Yorkers who go to Hollywood seeking fame and fortune and then flee
back to the city as soon as they can—Woody Allen’s pro–New York/antiHollywood attitude being typical—Bass seemingly loved the open, natural environment of Los Angeles and eventually morphed into a cowboy
hat–wearing westerner.5 As early as 1954, a journalist wrote: “The Basses
. . . show no signs of homesickness for the East.”6 As a result, there are few
documented statements about the designer’s New York experience, other

228

The Urban Landscape
than that he loved to visit art museums and lived “on the other side of the
tracks.”7

Cityscapes
Saul Bass employed a variety of strategies to depict the urban landscape in
his title sequences, moving from the pure modernist art abstraction of
Seven Year Itch (1955) and the indexical abstraction of Four Just Men
(1959) to the live-action geometric designs of North by Northwest (1959),
Something Wild (1961), and Alcoa Premiere (1961), the visual chaos of
big-city graffiti in West Side Story (1961), and the flashing lights of his two
Las Vegas movies, Ocean’s Eleven (1960) and Casino (1995). Interestingly, although the degree of abstraction shifts from one title sequence to
the next, all demonstrate some level of formalist design, especially in terms
of their visual composition and editing.
Bass’s titles for The Seven Year Itch are the most nonrepresentational
of his career. They reference modernist painting directly, as does his poster
for Anatomy of a Murder, but they also spoof abstract painting as it had
developed since the turn of the twentieth century. Given that this was
only Bass’s third title sequence, the credits for The Seven Year Itch are
both astonishingly original and self-assured. The play of the same name,
written by George Axelrod, was the biggest comedy hit of the 1952–1953
season. Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer wanted to purchase the screen rights as a
vehicle for June Allyson and Van Johnson,8 but instead they were purchased for $225,000 by Charles K. Feldman, a former agent turned independent film producer. A year later, Feldman announced that he had
signed a joint production deal with 20th Century–Fox and that Billy
Wilder would coproduce and direct the film version.9 The titles were contracted out to National Screen Service, Hollywood’s biggest producer of
posters and a major contractor for screen titles; NSS apparently hired Bass
to create the titles for the film, perhaps at Wilder’s behest. NSS, however,
was more than willing to take credit for the titles after numerous reviewers
commented favorably on them; the company even purchased advertisements in the trades to crow its achievement.10 Until that time, reviewers
commenting specifically about film titles was unheard of, but it would
happen again and again when Bass was behind the product.
As would happen repeatedly, Bass’s titles were praised, but the film
itself received mixed reviews, mostly because critics were disappointed

229

SAUL BASS
that Axelrod’s biting sex comedy had been watered down owing to the
Motion Picture Production Code and the Catholic Legion of Decency.11
Indeed, as a play, The Seven Year Itch was a frank, funny, adult meditation
on marital infidelity, whereas the film was about only the desire to commit
adultery; following through would have required punishing the adulterer,
at least as far as Joseph Breen and the MPPC Office were concerned,
which would hardly be compatible with a comedy. Nevertheless, the film
became the fourth highest grossing of 1955, earning $7.8 million.
Although Bass received screen credit for the titles, neither the studio press
materials nor reviewers mentioned his name. The one exception was Variety, which wrote: “Saul Bass’ main title, a series of hinged and perambulatory patches on a multi-colored field attracted audience comment at the
Broadway preview Wednesday at Loew’s State. Remarked one lady:
‘Credits arranged this way are very interesting—and you don’t have to
read them.’ Which is the sort of crack which gives New Yorkers a bad
name in Hollywood where screen credits come first before the wife and
the trust fund.”12
Jack Moffitt in the Hollywood Reporter also commented on Wilder’s
many production innovations, including the “novel and amusing” title
cards, while Showman’s Trade Review concluded: “The picture deserves at
least a variant of an Academy Award for its extremely effective head title.”
Finally, in keeping with Bass’s often-stated intentions, Motion Picture
Daily commented that the boxed credits set the tone for the picture.13
Bass himself witnessed audience reaction to the titles at Loew’s State in
New York: “As the main title appeared there was a sudden buzz of excitement, murmurs of approval while everyone sat up in their seats awaiting
the opening shots. It was a very special experience.”14
Bass’s titles begin with a black Cinemascope screen in which an orange
vertical rectangle appears, which is then attached to a yellow horizontal
rectangle. On the sound track, the audience hears orchestral music with
plenty of horns, which is immediately recognizable as connoting the hustle and bustle of the big city. As the music continues, the film frame is
filled with twenty-one adjoining boxes in various sizes and shades from
almost white to pink to dark reddish brown. As the last rectangle moves
around the frame, it falls into place in the last remaining black space, only
to open again to reveal elaborate white, handcrafted serif type on a black
background, spelling out Charles K. Feldman’s above-the-title producer
credit. After the “door” closes again, three boxes on the left and one on

230

The Urban Landscape
the right open to reveal the film’s title. All subsequent credits, beginning
with those of the stars, Marilyn Monroe and Tom Ewell, appear in these
boxes as they open to black. In keeping with Bass’s trademark surprise
ending, Billy Wilder’s directorial credit pops out of the flat space on a
spring and bounces around like a jack-in-the-box.
As early as 1955, then, we see Bass utilizing pure abstraction in his
credit sequence for The Seven Year Itch. The rectangle pattern mimics the
grid of urban streets and parks, as if looking straight down at a map (or
Google Earth), a more abstract version of West Side Story’s prologue
(described later). In fact, the concept of using flat planes of color to visualize topographies links Bass’s titles for The Seven Year Itch to modernist
painting. The sequence recalls both American Abstract Expressionists and
German painters of the Bauhaus, particularly Paul Klee. Klee’s Flora on
Sand (1927), for example, is one of a series of topographic paintings that
reduce the picture frame to variously sized squares and rectangles of
muted color, similar to Bass’s titles. Yet one can also argue that Bass’s
color palette is at some level representational, since the browns, ochers,
yellows, and lavenders are reminiscent of the New York City brownstones
that are the setting of the film. Similarly, the music is abstract yet also representational of traffic, a theme picked up in the film’s first image of male
commuters racing around the now womanless city streets in August. At
the same time, the way Bass limits his color palette to black, white, and
hues ranging from red to brown makes the sequence nothing if not a
study of a limited segment of the color wheel, just as Klee’s 1930 painting
Farbtafel (Color Chart), which uses more regularized squares, is also a
meditation on pure abstract color. Certainly, as Bass would have learned
from Kepes, Bauhaus art aesthetics emphasize geometry and abstraction
as central elements of composition within the two-dimensional frame.
Clinching the reference to modernist abstract art, Bass places his own
credit in the lower right-hand corner of the frame, as if he were signing a
painting.
In apparent contradistinction to such references to modern art, the
typography of the credits, with its extreme serifs and curlicues, eschews
the modern look of Swiss sans serif fonts and instead emphasizes serendipity and comedy, more in keeping with Wilder’s humorous narrative. When
the film’s title comes on, the t in Itch gives a little shake—an almost literal
visualization of the word. The spring attached to the final directorial credit
propels it forward off the two-dimensional frame of the color field; in

231

SAUL BASS
addition to representing Bass’s trademark surprise ending, this may be a
literary reference to Georges Feydeau, a hugely popular French belle
époque playwright of sex farces.15 Billy Wilder certainly would have seen
Feydeau’s The Girl from Maxim’s (1899) and A Flea in Her Ear (1907),
both of which were repeatedly staged in Germany and France in the interwar period. Very much like Ernst Lubitsch, whom Wilder adored, Feydeau loved sudden narrative reversals and coincidences, leading one
contemporary critic to comment on the jack-in-the-box construction of
his plays—an observation Bass literalizes in his final image. However, the
joke may also be on modernist abstract art, which lay critics often poohpoohed as empty and contentless, something a child could paint. Bass
visually illustrates the notion that there is nothing behind the art, just an
empty black space. Ironically, Wilder was a collector of modernist art,
including paintings by Picasso, Giacometti, Calder, Renoir, and Dufy.16
Somewhat less abstract renditions of a cityscape are seen in Bass’s
titles for the British television series Four Just Men (1959–1961). Based
on characters created by author Edgar Wallace, the crime series follows
the exploits of four friends who met in the Italian campaign during World
War II. A professor of law (Richard Conte), a member of Parliament (Jack
Hawkins), a foreign correspondent (Dan Daily), and a hotelier (Vittorio
De Sica), they now live in New York, London, Paris, and Rome, respectively, and work essentially as vigilantes fighting international crime. All
four appeared in the pilot episode, establishing their relationship. Thereafter, they starred individually in episodes filmed on location in their
respective home cities. Given its international cast of major stars, none of
whom had previously worked in television, Four Just Men was one of the
most expensive and ambitious shows broadcast in the United Kingdom.
However, since the thirty-nine half-hour episodes broadcast on ITV failed
to find an American sponsor and were therefore not shown on network
television, the series did not deliver a return on investment and was quickly
canceled.17
The credit sequence begins with a black “1” inside a small white circle
on a gray field, with lines moving out in every direction from the center.18
The same sequence repeats itself three more times with the numbers 2, 3,
and 4 at the center. The graphic then adds two more white circles in the
right top quadrant of crisscrossing lines to enclose the words “Just Men,”
while Bass’s credit appears on a horizontal line at frame left, below the
horizontal axis. The graphic for each number then reappears, but with the

232

The Urban Landscape
name of a city in the circle and a black-and-white close-up photograph of
the star behind it. The graphic then fades out and is replaced by the star’s
name, centered in white, sans serif capital letters above the horizontal axis.
The graphic clearly represents an abstract version of a street map for
each of the major metropolitan areas featured in the series. However,
while the city names are identified and the constellation of lines appears to
be different for each city, it is not possible to graph the title design on an
actual map of those cities. The representation of the city through the circle and lines is thus indexical in the sense of representing a real place, but
it is also a graphic abstraction. Bass used a similar abstract design for a billboard advertisement for British Airways in 1957.19 The intersecting lines,
as in the title graphic, also represent the personal interconnections between
the principal characters. Bass thus creates an effective and extremely simple graphic design that is instantly readable to a large number of viewers
as representing an urban landscape.
The most striking aspect of Bass’s titles for Alfred Hitchcock’s North
by Northwest (1959) is that they begin with a graphic design and then dissolve to live-action shots that make concrete what had previously been
rendered abstractly. This mixture of media was probably the result of budgetary constraints, which similarly impacted Bass’s titles for John Frankenheimer’s The Young Stranger (1957) and later Otto Preminger’s The
Human Factor (1979), both of which utilize graphic designs in the opening titles before transitioning to credits over live-action shots.20 Indeed,
Hitchcock’s production was apparently close to $1 million over budget
before the titles were even produced, so Bass was paid “a ridiculously low
amount” and crafted the live-action portion of the titles from second-unit
outtakes of Manhattan streets.21 Despite the striking look of his graphic
opening, it was nevertheless a rehash of ideas he had tried to sell to Preminger for Anatomy of a Murder and would reutilize in a different form for
Psycho. Another anomaly is the fact that the titles use the standard grid in
conjunction with strong diagonals, a design element Bass would not
return to until Higher Learning (1995) at the end of his career.
The North by Northwest titles open with a black-and-white version of
Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer’s lion logo that is matted, uncharacteristically, on
a green background that remains on the screen after the logo dissolves
away. It is replaced by thin dark-blue lines that stream in first diagonally
and irregularly from the left side of the frame and then vertically from the
bottom, creating a diagonal grid at a forty-five-degree angle to the vertical

233

SAUL BASS
axis, as Bernard Herrmann’s frenetic orchestral score is heard on the
sound track. The vertical axis then serves as a track on which white capital
letters ride up and down, beginning with “METRO-GOLDWYNMAYER” entering from the top and “PRESENTS” from the bottom; the
lettering is centered but resting diagonally. Bass then more than doubles
the size of the sans serif type for the above-the-title credits for Cary Grant,
Eva Marie Saint, and Alfred Hitchcock, as well as for the film’s title. Each
title rides up or down into the frame, the movement of the typography
offset by the countermovement of a short white bar to the left or right.
Next, the costarring credits enter from the top and bottom as the green
background dissolves to an image of a skyscraper; the grid is revealed to
be the pattern on the building’s all-glass facade, while New York City
street traffic is reflected in the windows. The major artistic and technical
credits continue to rise from the bottom and the top, always accompanied
by a white bar moving in the opposite direction. The names are all in one
font size, and the all-capital designations are half that size but also centered within the frame, appearing almost three-dimensional due to their
placement on the diagonal grid. Bass then cuts to closer shots of crowds
walking out of the building’s entrance and down a staircase,22 as the standard disclaimer about events and characters being fictitious slides in from
the left, just below the screen’s horizontal axis. More street shots follow,
including two women fighting over a taxi, as Hebert Coleman’s associate
producer credit and Alfred Hitchcock’s director credit slide into the frame
and then out the other side. The final credit is accompanied by a shot of
a city bus halting at a bus stop and then pulling away, just as the master
himself makes his trademark cameo and misses the bus, followed by
another shot of the building’s entrance—in fact, the same shot seen earlier
with a woman in a blue dress leaving the premises—beginning the narrative proper.
In North by Northwest, then, Bass works with three separate design
elements: the diagonal grid structure that morphs into an urban skyscraper, the images of big-city human and vehicular traffic, and the movement of the typography. The last actually mimics the vertical movement
of an elevator inside the building, as indicated by the ever-present bar
moving in the opposite direction and signifying the elevator’s counterweight.23 Alternatively, Donald Spoto interprets the vertical movement as
“prefiguring the final clinging and falling from the sheer rocks” at the end
of the film, creating a circular narrative structure.24 The diagonal grid

234

The Urban Landscape
structure on a “violent green” background serves not only as a device for
the movement of text but also as a simile for all urban architecture.25 The
diagonal view, in keeping with natural vision in a crowded urban environment, and the grid structure reflect abstracted cityscapes as imagined by
Bass. However, the symbolism of green, which is a shade darker than
green’s baseline, is less clear. Indeed, the use of blue and green may at first
seem counterintuitive because they are natural colors that soothe and
calm the spirit. However, the color makes sense as a starting point for a
narrative arc from order and stability to chaos and disorder, indicated by
the dissolve to the face of the actual building, which is at first visually difficult to read, given the distortions resulting from the images reflected in
the uneven pieces of glass. The dominant color in the glass, other than
gray (reflecting the cliffs at the end?), is the yellow of the taxi cabs, a color
signifying danger. Once he moves to images of the teeming, anonymous
masses, Bass starts to play with visual tropes of the city, which he will
repeatedly use in other title sequences and his own films. In his titles,
then, Bass is creating a visual shorthand for the narrative of a New York
City advertising executive (Cary Grant) whose ordinary life is thrown into
chaos when he is mistaken for an assassin. Hitchcock’s cameo as a frustrated commuter, just after the directorial credit, is yet another example of
Bass’s trademark surprise ending, and it was not the first time Hitch played
a traveler on public transportation.26
If North by Northwest delivers a graphic representation of urban architecture before dissolving to an actual building in New York, then Bass’s
titles for the television show Alcoa Premiere (1961–1962) vacillate
between abstract graphic designs and an almost utopian vision of a modern city created solely with miniatures in what is structured as a 180-degree
view of a concrete and steel landscape. The mostly dramatic, omnibustype series was hosted by Fred Astaire, who faded in from Bass’s titles to
introduce each week’s episode. Alcoa had previously sponsored three television programs since 1955, all of which had slightly different omnibus
formats; this one featured revolving casts and stories. The program was
not tied to New York or any other urban landscape, since some episodes
were modern westerns and others were historical, but it tackled some serious and controversial subjects. In reviewing the opening show, Variety
called it “one of the best dramas on ABC-TV this season” because it tackled a “difficult, unpleasant theme.” But it then went on to say that the
show was no better than “some of the middlin’ successful stanzas done in

235

SAUL BASS
the old days” on Playhouse 90.27 Numerous better-known directors participated, including John Ford, John Brahm, Alan Crosland Jr., George
Schaeffer, and Norman Lloyd, as well as writers Lionel Trilling and Peter
Tewksbury. Actors making guest appearances included Lee Marvin,
Jimmy Stewart, Keir Dullea, Dana Andrews, George Kennedy, Shelley
Winters, and Kurt Kasznar.28
The deal for Alcoa Premiere was probably set up by MCA’s Lew Wasserman, who had made clients Ronald Reagan (General Electric Theater)
and Alfred Hitchcock (Alfred Hitchcock Presents) rich as two-minute hosts
and partial “owners” of their respective shows, guaranteeing them a percentage of the profits.29 Wasserman was also Astaire’s agent, and production costs were kept low by shooting at Revue Studios, owned by MCA.
But the program folded after only two seasons and fifty-eight episodes,
unlike Reagan’s and Hitch’s seven- and ten-season jackpots. The Alcoa
company magazine Al-Zalean reported in spring 1963 that Alcoa Premiere’s last show would be on 12 September. Alcoa then began sponsoring the Huntley-Brinkley news show. The back cover of the September–
October 1964 issue of Al-Zalean announced that the company would
sponsor a new show, Alcoa Preview, hosted by Douglas Fairbanks Jr.30
Bass got involved in Alcoa Premiere because he had been hired in
March 1961 to redesign Alcoa’s corporate identity, having previously
designed a brochure for the company in 1959.31 The new identity, called
the “Mark of Alcoa,” was introduced with a full-page advertisement in the
Wall Street Journal in February 1963.32 Alcoa Premiere’s first show aired
on 10 October 1961, so Bass must have completed the titles that summer,
before the new logo had been designed or approved. According to a company report, in 1961 Alcoa formed a “graphics committee” headed by
T. M. Hunt, general manager of advertising and promotion, to oversee
the design of a new corporate logo by Saul Bass.33 Bass also suggested
changing the company’s primary name to ALCOA (all caps), whereas
previously it had always used “Alcoa” on the logo in conjunction with the
complete name, Aluminum Company of America.34 In December 1962 a
newly designed company logo was presented to employees in Al-Zalean.
The new logo and name was rolled out to the general public in January
1963, when Bass created a series of thirty-second television spots,
“ALCOA New Mark,” which were broadcast during episodes of Alcoa
Premiere. The spots feature moving camera shots (as if taken from a car)
of various directional road signs, both freestanding and in the pavement;

236

The Urban Landscape
they end with the new ALCOA logo—a geometric design that could very
well be a road sign—while a narrator states that ALCOA is moving in a
new direction with a new mark.35 Bass had already tested some of these
design ideas in Something Wild (tracking the camera along the pavement)
and West Side Story (utilizing street signs). He reused the design of the
“New Mark” commercials in his opening titles for the prestigious British
ITV weekly newsmagazine This Week (1965), as well as for lead-ins and
promos.36
The Alcoa Premiere titles begin with free-floating white dashes that
grow in size as they move from the background to the foreground, followed by oval-shaped discs repeating the motion. “ALCOA” then appears
center screen in capital letters, turning around its own horizontal axis; the
name zooms forward as the oval discs disappear, filling the screen. Behind
“ALCOA,” “PREMIERE” appears upside down in the background,
repeating the movement of the first word until the typography covers the
horizontal axis of the screen. While “PREMIERE” continues to stretch
and then fade out, white ovals and dashes repeat their original movement
forward, until changes in the lighting reveal the dashes to be the highcontrast roofs of skyscrapers. The camera zooms in and moves horizontally past the facades of numerous skyscrapers. Panning right to reveal
giant gray cylinders behind the model skyscrapers, the camera suddenly
changes direction, quickly panning up and over the cylinders to a vertical
shot straight down, where five rooftops form the letters A L C O A, columns surrounded by circles, squares, and rectangles. The announcer is
heard off camera: “Alcoa Premiere. Brought to you by the Aluminum
Company of America.” Next, the camera zooms in to a close-up on the
O, whose center dissolves to an image of palm trees and the ocean; the
zoom continues until the ocean view fills the screen. The end title sequence
essentially reverses the motion, zooming out from the O to ALCOA and
then to the model cityscape. As the episode credits appear onscreen, the
camera begins a ninety-degree track around the model; then, through dissolves, the sequence cuts between similar tracking shots left and zooms in
on the model. Bass’s own credit appears on the very last title, just above
the guild logos.
As in the case of North by Northwest, Bass’s titles for Alcoa Premiere
transition from purely graphic two-dimensional representations to threedimensional architectural renderings. Here, the transition occurs from a
two-dimensional space created by television special effects to a three-

237

SAUL BASS
dimensional space created by models of a metropolitan cityscape. Similarly, the abstract and pliable designs of the former morph into a seemingly
real space because the facades are constructed of photographs glued to
columns of varying heights, simulating a dense urban landscape. Happily,
set photographs of the three-dimensional cityscape model were published,
allowing us to see exactly how Bass shot the sequence.37 By employing
very high-key lighting, continuously changing the pools of light illuminating the model structures, and keeping the background dark, even
when shooting straight down on the model, Bass creates the illusion that
the tops of the “buildings” are white. He thus ingeniously sutures the two
segments by perfectly matching cuts from free-floating forms to the concrete rooftops of his artificial cityscape. Bass painted the cardboard and
plaster models with a highly reflective paint to give them a metallic quality,
in keeping with the sponsor’s product. Interestingly, because some of the
buildings have photographed facades, while others appear to be architectural models, Bass consciously creates a vision of an urban environment
that is both modern and modern art, concrete in an indexical sense and
purely abstract. Furthermore, by bundling his signifiers of modernity—
vertically thrusting buildings with clean lines; tall, round columns morphing into purely abstract forms, changing with the light—Bass communicates
not only something about the television show to come but also something about its sponsor. Whether the columns are actually made of aluminum is less important than the fact that they could be. ALCOA is therefore
identified with modern abstract art, with modern urban architecture, and
with aluminum products. It is the kind of sequence that can only work in
black and white, because the transformation of the image relies heavily on
changing light patterns of black, gray, and white. Just as Moholy-Nagy
used his light modulator to similar effect, Bass employs a camera to create
a study in light and form that visualizes the modern city. Bass in fact
designed a “city” on a set, and it moves from a concrete reality to an
abstraction in steel and aluminum that is pure Bauhaus.
The breathtaking opening sequence and closing credits for Alcoa Premiere, with its horizontal camera movement past skyscrapers, can be seen
as a continuation of the cosmic lateral track in West Side Story (1961),
where the camera is looking straight down on New York buildings and
transforming the city into a geometric topography.38 Furthermore, like
Alcoa Premiere and North by Northwest, Bass begins his opening title for
West Side Story as a pure abstraction, which then dissolves into a real

238

The Urban Landscape
image.39 Bass is credited in West Side Story for the titles and as a visual consultant; he was directly responsible for the opening sequence over the
overture, the helicopter shots of New York, and the closing titles. Inspired
by William Shakespeare’s Romeo and Juliet, the Broadway musical was
written by Arthur Laurents, with lyrics by Steven Sondheim and music by
Leonard Bernstein. It premiered at the Winter Garden Theatre on 26
September 1957 and ran for 732 performances. The film rights were purchased by Walter Mirish for $375,000, after Seven Arts bowed out of the
project; Mirish then approached Robert Wise to produce and direct
alongside Jerome Robbins, the original director on Broadway.40 However, after only a third of the film had been completed, including the
opening musical number, Mirish fired Robbins because the novice film
director had supposedly gone overbudget by demanding endless takes.41
The film was completed in early summer 1961 and premiered on 18
October 1961. Costing more than $6 million, the 155-minute film was
the most successful movie of the year, earning $12 million from a $43
million gross and garnering eleven Academy Awards—more than any
other musical in history.
The reviews were very positive, with plenty of credit going to Wise
and the technical crew. In particular, reviewers commented on the Bass
overture and the opening sequence, high over New York. Arthur Knight
wrote in the Saturday Review: “One can only say that Saul Bass, the visual
consultant, and/or Boris Leven, the production designer, have made this
film as exciting pictorially as it is musically and dramatically—aided of
course, by the magnificent color photography of Daniel Fapp.”42 James
Powers congratulated Bass on his “moody introductory frames,” while
Variety’s critic thought the titles and credits were novel.43 However, it was
the opening montage of helicopter shots that most impressed the critics,
even in retrospect. As Todd McCarthy indicates: “Even now, after all the
years, the film’s opening minutes—the abstracted representation of Manhattan against changing colors and eventual pullback to reveal the title,
backed by a magnificent orchestration of the most thrilling overture in
movie musical history, followed by the quiet aerial shots looking directly
down on the city—by themselves provide emotional frissons beyond anything emanating from the stage show.”44
Bass and Kirkham claim that Saul was not responsible for the signature poster for West Side Story, although in terms of color, spatial construction, and the logo of two dancing juvenile delinquents that appeared

239

SAUL BASS
in virtually all the film’s collateral, it certainly conforms to the Bass style.45
The sheet music for the musical’s hit song “Tonight”; the lobby cards; the
one-, three-, and six-sheet posters; and the promotion brochure all utilized Bass designs and colors, while many foreign posters and United Artists’ re-release in 1968 used the same basic design but changed the colors,
inserting multicolored images in the typography.46 From the existing documentation, it is unclear whether Bass merely disowned the poster after it
might have been altered by the studio publicity department or whether it
was a copycat design. With Bass’s minimalist color scheme of black-andwhite typography on a red background, the space below the horizontal
axis is taken up with the title, “WEST SIDE STORY,” each word stacked
above the other and spelled out in a military stencil, sans serif type that
creates an edifice, much like a New York tenement neighborhood. The
designer here uses typography architecturally, something Bass would
repeat in his poster for The Cardinal. The visual impression of a slum is
strengthened by attaching abstracted, metal fire-escape ladders to the
right side of the typography and having two white-silhouetted dancers on
the fire escape. The white dancers find their opposite in a pair of black silhouettes dancing at the top right-hand corner of the poster, signifying the
Jets and the Sharks. Perfectly balancing the black dancers against the red
background and the black title below is a triangle of white credits in a
simple, modern type, the base of the triangle matching the “roof” of the
building. The poster and advertising thus have all the characteristics of the
Bass brand: a clean, simple design; strong colors; modern typography; and
an image that is both abstract and iconographic.
The storyboards designed by Bass for the opening musical number
have been published, but since there is no one-to-one correlation
between the storyboards and what Robbins shot, the authorship remains
hazy.47 The sequence has indications of Bass’s influence, especially the
montage of bodies in motion, constantly changing direction, and the use
of fences and other objects in the foreground, exaggerating the movement of the camera and of the actors in the background; Bass would use
a similar technique in his titles for A Walk on the Wild Side. Wise asked
Bass to conceive and produce the opening title sequence because he did
not want Bernstein’s beautiful overture to be muffled behind the curtain—the practice at the time was to play the overture with the curtain
down. Therefore, he needed something visual onscreen if the curtain was
to be raised.48 Wise, however, claimed that the helicopter shots of New

240

The Urban Landscape
York were his idea: “One of the solutions was the opening of the film, the
flight over New York. That was my idea, I wanted to show New York as
a real city, because that’s where our story is taking place. At the same
time, by shooting straight down in the patterns and forms the city gave
us, we delivered this ‘real’ New York in an abstract way.”49 The idea may
have been Wise’s, but the execution, especially the composition of the
cityscape, bears all the hallmarks of the Bass style, and Bass took credit for
shooting the helicopter footage.50 Meanwhile, the credits were put at the
end of the film because there were so many of them, given the need to
credit both the theater and film productions. Furthermore, as Bass states
in Bass on Titles, because a major character dies at the end, the producers
thought the audience might need a moment to collect themselves after
such an emotional finale, and the end credits would allow them to do
that. Bass also opined that the graffiti-style credits grew out of the visual
violence in the film.
In place of the opening credits, a yellow-tinted graphic appears consisting of a pattern of very thin vertical lines of extremely variable lengths;
it covers the top half of the frame, forming an irregular semicircle whose
circumference begins and ends at the top of the frame. The lines have a
strong similarity to computer graphics, but they remain static; meanwhile,
the background tint changes over the course of the overture from yellow
to red, orange, purple, and blue. Four and a half minutes into the overture, the camera slowly zooms out, and the graphic diminishes in size but
also takes on mass. The lines form rectangles in a darker blue, while the
film’s title appears in caps at the bottom of the frame in a font created
from the same vertical lines, which then turn white as the blue intensifies.
Through a perfectly matched dissolve, the graphic pattern at the top
morphs into a live-action view of Lower Manhattan, as the title fades out
and the overture ends.
The aerial view of Manhattan cuts to an overhead shot of a bridge surrounded by water, its road dissecting the frame just below the horizontal
axis as the camera moves left. Through movement and form, Bass matches
that cut to another bridge, its left side forming a circular ramp that fills the
left side of the screen. A docked ocean liner is seen next, its hull matched
to the bridge. The camera continues to move left in the next five bird’seye-view shots of Manhattan. More shots follow: the United Nations
building (reprising North by Northwest), the Empire State Building, parking lots, Yankee Stadium, Columbia University, and housing projects.

241

SAUL BASS
The last image of Hell’s Kitchen plunges in a swift camera zoom to the
ground, then cuts to a large basketball court where the first confrontation–dance number between the Jets and the Sharks occurs.
While the opening sequence tracks continuously to the left, the closing credits reverse the movement and basically track right, along an old
brick wall covered with “WEST SIDE STORY” in block letters. The camera zooms in to the “directed by” credit for Wise and Robbins, which is
written in chalk; then it tracks left to the screenplay and other credits, all
tagged as graffiti. Bass dissolves to an abandoned storefront whose windows have been whited out with glass wax, and the production credits
appear to be written with a finger. Next, the camera zooms in on a wooden
fence, where more credits are scrawled, and then dissolves to a stucco wall
with the principal actors’ credits, the camera panning up from one to the
next. The supporting roles appear as white, justified text onscreen, with
another wall as background; the camera then pans right and down to
reveal more production credits as graffiti. Indeed, all the remaining production credits alternate between graffiti on walls, doors, and street signs
and white, justified text onscreen, while themes from the overture are
replayed on the track. The idea of titles as urban graffiti and the camera
tracking along a brick wall had previously been used in an Ealing comedy,
Hue and Cry (1947, Charles Crichton), which Bass may have seen, since
the film was released in the United States in 1951.51
Thus, West Side Story’s narrative is sandwiched between the opening,
soaring high over the city, and the closing credits, which take the audience
to the depths—that is, between heaven and hell. Bass’s opening swoops
down from the bird’s-eye view to the urban basketball court that is the
setting for the opening number and a central character’s death, a movement into the urban hell. The film’s trailer follows an identical arc, abridging Bass’s opening montage.52 While the view from on high reveals a
geometric and almost godly order, each image carefully composed to
express balance and symmetry, lines and squares, the end credits are hidden in the visual chaos and disorder of street graffiti. The camera must
search for the credits among huge amounts of extraneous visual noise,
leaving the impression of a city run amok—an impression that not even
the white, justified credits onscreen (conforming to all the Bass principles
of design) can alleviate. The color tints during the overture are synchronized to the moods and themes of the musical’s songs; for example, for
“Tonight,” the screen turns Bass’s favorite fire-engine red, then transi-

242

The Urban Landscape
tions through orange and pink to blue for “Maria” and then to orange for
Bernstein’s “Mamba.” Expressing color as pure emotion in relation to
song, Bass designs a palette of mostly primary colors that evolves to the
more muted colors of an urban New York topography: grays, browns,
blues, greens, and spots of other primary colors. The end titles, which also
mark class distinctions, are reduced to the drab grays, browns, blacks, and
chalk whites of urban street graffiti. This steady draining of color implies
a narrative of decay, just as the paint is peeling on the first tenement wall,
where “WEST SIDE STORY” once glowed. The film’s narrative is thus
encapsulated in the movement from high, colorful aspirations of both
love and democracy to an underworld of gang violence and anarchy, a
tragedy not of noble birth but of violence.
Even the alteration between screen and scene text, between handscrawled letters and modernist typography, seems as random as the killing
that concludes the film. The view from on high is a tourist’s view of a
great metropolitan city; the quick zoom down to the playground is an
indication that the audience will see the dark underside of the urban environment. The camera movement in the end titles is highly controlled to
appear erratic, always searching its next target rather than knowing where
to find it, like Orpheus in the dark. I may be reading too much of a literary countermyth into Bass’s symbolic use of color here, but Shakespeare’s
Romeo and Juliet is not about ethnic and class warfare; it is about rivalries
within the ruling class. Finally, unlike the street signs and pavement markings that confidently and optimistically point the way in Bass’s commercials for ALCOA or even in his titles for Something Wild, the street signs
in the end credits of West Side Story are useless discards, randomly tossed
in a dark corner and leading to nowhere. Just as the urban dilemmas of
poverty, housing, and labor had become increasingly contentious topics
in 1961, given the burgeoning civil rights movement, Bass’s signage no
longer points the way.
While Alfred Hitchcock’s North by Northwest opens inside the United
Nations building in New York City, Jack Garfein’s Something Wild (1961)
begins with an image outside the UN. Similarly, while the titles for North
by Northwest focus on one busy Midtown Manhattan skyscraper, Bass’s
titles for Something Wild present a portrait of New York that focuses on
urban architecture, traffic, and teeming masses of pedestrians in the first
three-quarters and city lights in the last quarter, thus employing Bass’s

243

SAUL BASS
two favorite urban tropes. Based on the novel Mary Ann (1958), by Alex
Karmel, the production was independently financed by Garfein and his
then-wife, actress Carroll Baker, who starred; the film was distributed by
United Artists. Hollywood still relied almost exclusively on studio production, but Something Wild was shot wholly on location in New York
City in the summer of 1960, and it was shot chronologically, another
anomaly for Hollywood but a growing trend among independent features. Although the New York Times listed the budget as $900,000, Garfein later pegged it at $350,000, more like an independent film.53 Saul
Bass was hired a year later, in June 1961, indicating that there may have
been production or financial problems; in addition, Aaron Copland was
hired in September 1961 to write the film’s score after the previous composer, Morton Feldman, was fired.54 Garfein had survived a Nazi concentration camp as a child, immigrating to the United States after the war and
then joining the Actors’ Studio, where he became a disciple of method
acting (hence the chronological shoot). He had directed one previous
film, The Strange One (1957), the story of a mobbing at a southern military academy for boys. Garfein ran into trouble with the studio censors at
Columbia, however, because he insisted on shooting a scene with African
American actors.55 In a 1963 profile, Albert Johnson called Garfein
“America’s angriest young director.”56
Garfein seemed to court controversy. The film begins with an oncamera rape scene, shows brief nudity, and features a happy ending that
includes marriage, even though the male lead kidnaps the heroine and
keeps her locked up for months against her will in his apartment. Not surprisingly, the black-and-white film was roundly panned and flopped miserably, not even playing in major markets after its New York premiere on
23 December 1961. Disappointed reviewers apparently expected an arty,
European-flavored independent feature but got an overdetermined Hollywood ending instead.57 However, there were exceptions. Jonas Mekas
called Something Wild “the most interesting American film of the quarter;
it may become the most underestimated film of the year.”58 Recently, the
film has been rehabilitated as a weird but fascinating piece, possibly
because the so-called Stockholm syndrome has made the film’s narrative
credible.59 At the time, though, it was just another case of praise for Bass
titles attached to a bad film, with one reviewer noting that the titles “were
the most original item about the whole production.”60 Albert Johnson
called the title designs of New York City “stunning.”61 However, another

244

The Urban Landscape
critic disliked the credits, calling them “some of the most absurd credit
titles Saul Bass has so far perpetrated.”62
Bass’s opening shot of the United Nations is followed by various
abstracted images of urban architecture; it ends with the camera panning
down a building, the movement accelerating by switching to longer focal
lengths, as the above-the-title credits for the production company and
Carroll Baker appear onscreen in white sans serif type. The movement
comes to an abrupt halt on a bird’s-eye view of a city street; trolley tracks
slice the image at the horizontal axis, and the film’s title appears centered
just above as Aaron Copland’s blaring horns signify city traffic. Bass cuts in
more shots of pedestrians from the same angle, then goes to street level as
Ralph Meeker’s name appears. Subsequent shots of automobile traffic
from both bird’s-eye and ground views, much of it in fast motion, accompany the remaining actors’ credits in left-justified black type at screen left.
The horizontal motion of the cars is picked up by the camera swish-panning right over white lines in the pavement, coming to a quick halt as shadows of pedestrians pass and the screenplay credits appear on the horizontal
axis. Close-up images of flying pigeons transition to shots of the sky, with
the sun at the exact center of the frame, as the credits for Eugene Schüfftan’s cinematography and Copland’s music are centered one-third above
and below the sun, respectively. The sun remains in the center, growing
incrementally from shot to shot but now framed to the left and right by
urban architecture and the major technical credits, either left- or right-justified. The sun then match-dissolves to a headlight and an urban nightscape, followed by images of Times Square news tickers that are increasingly
enlarged and abstracted, morphing into out-of-focus headlights as the
minor technical credits and producer’s credit are seen across the bottom of
the screen. That image dissolves again to a shot taken from a subway train
entering an underground station for Garfein’s director’s credit, followed
by a shot of blurred subway windows as the train leaves the station.
The titles for Something Wild are among the most mathematically
precise of Bass’s career. The 2:45-minute title sequence is exactly divided
into three sections of 65 seconds, 65 seconds, and 35 seconds (or 37.5
percent, 37.5 percent, and 25 percent). The opening section, during
which the above- and below-the-title actors’ credits are seen, focuses on
the facades of New York buildings and pedestrian and vehicular traffic.
The second section inserts images of the sun, sky, and nature (pigeons)
into the urban environment, over which the major behind-the-scenes

245

SAUL BASS
credits appear. The shorter third section, consisting of city and subway
lights, accompanies the final credits, including those for the producer and
director. The proportions correspond almost exactly to Gustav Freitag’s
triangle of dramatic structure for a five-act play, which in turn is derived
from Plato’s concept of the Golden Proportion: exposition, rising action,
climax, falling action, dénouement. In this scheme, then, the cacophony
of city sounds and fast-moving traffic mark the exposition and rising
action, the static images of nature and the sun mark the climax and falling
action, and the nightscapes mark the dénouement.
Bass’s editing structure within each sequence is equally precise. He
cuts consistently on form and movement, transitions compositionally
from stable to unstable, from stasis to movement, while utilizing a whole
catalog of avant-garde film techniques, including extreme camera angles,
multiple exposures, fast motion, changing focal lengths, and blurred
focus. Interestingly, unlike many visions of the city that emphasize the
verticality of form (skyscrapers) and movement, Bass sticks almost exclusively to horizontal movement—either camera movement or movement
within the frame—the exception being the opening camera movement
and the pedestrians behind the title. At the same time, Bass juxtaposes
images and text metaphorically. Thus, the title sequence’s second multiple
exposure of building facades resembles an expressionist set from The Cabinet of Dr. Caligari (1919), indicating that the narrative has an uncertain
grasp on reality. The image of the building facade behind Carroll Baker’s
credit is divided along the vertical axis, half in light and half in darkness,
followed by the camera’s plunge to the street, prefiguring her own somewhat schizophrenic emotional state and subsequent fall after the rape and
kidnapping (she is held in a basement apartment). The credit for Ralph
Meeker, who plays an anonymous loner, is accompanied by a visually chaotic and truncated image of pedestrians’ legs and feet. Finally, the centered and stable image of the sun as a phenomenon of nature in the
man-made chaos of the city reflects the film’s central narrative conceit:
that humanity and human goodness can survive, even in the most horrific
circumstances, allowing love to shine, like the lights of Broadway.

City Lights
The city at night has fascinated filmmakers since at least the 1920s. Avantgarde films, whether Walter Ruttmann’s Berlin Sinfonie einer Grossstadt

246

The Urban Landscape
(1927), Pierre Chenal’s Paris Cinéma (1928), Alain Tanner and Claude
Goretta’s Nice Time (1957), or William Klein’s Broadway by Light (1958),
discovered the intense visual possibilities of electric city lights, making
them a theme for modernist explorations of urban space. Bass carried on
that tradition in his live-action images of the city in the titles for Something
Wild and Casino, turning the latter into a visual symphony of Las Vegas
glitz. But he also created a visual shorthand for graphically signifying city
lights, as embodied in theater marquees. The marquee signifies an urban
environment—specifically, New York City and Broadway—with all the
implications of being an entertainment capital, but it is also generalized
enough in design to function on Main Street in small-town America. In
the Bass universe, marquee lights signify the hopes and dreams of the
common person, as in The Sale of Manhattan, where the Jewish peddler
dreams of Broadway, or in the musings of a product in Bass’s two-minute
infomercial for Olin Mathieson, The History of a Package (1960), which
take form as the “Great White Way” in dot-matrix lights. The lights in
Bass’s graphic versions are abstract, logocentric, and indexical, utilizing
dot-matrix patterns to depict the mass of lightbulbs on a movie marquee
or a news ticker. An early trade ad for A Star Is Born (1954) features the
film’s title created with dots, as if blazing in Broadway lights, on a black
background, with Judy Garland below.63 The same year, Bass designed an
album cover for Elmer Bernstein’s Blues & Brass that used colored circles
on a black background to imagine a highly abstracted image of city lights
and traffic. Virtually the same design concept, execution, and even color
scheme were recycled in a 1959 brochure for Lightolier, a company specializing in decorative lighting.64 A monochromatic moving-image version of abstracted headlights in traffic, the slightly soft-focus circles
appearing in various shades of gray—Bass called them “circles of diffusion”—was also utilized for Bass’s opening and closing titles for Patterns
of Life (1957). This science program, produced at the University of Southern California and broadcast on an educational TV channel in Los Angeles, opened and closed with a jazz score by Elmer Bernstein.65 Bass also
reused the out-of-focus headlights in the opening title images for an Olin
Mathieson–sponsored television series called Small World (1959). But
Bass perfected his methodology with the introduction to the TV series
Playhouse 90, which begins with the identical image of abstracted car
headlights and then transitions to a graphic design consisting of a dotmatrix pattern.

247

SAUL BASS
Produced for CBS television, Playhouse 90 (1956–1960) was not the
first omnibus-type TV program, but it was one of the most famous. It
lasted for 133 episodes over four seasons after premiering on 4 October
1956 with a Rod Serling–scripted drama. The show featured first-rate talent behind the camera, such as John Frankenheimer, Sidney Lumet,
Franklin Schaffner, Fred Coe, Arthur Penn, Frank D. Gilroy, Horton
Foote, Abby Mann, and Paul Monash, as well as in front of it, including
Mickey Rooney, Jack Palance, Charles Laughton, Polly Bergen, Teresa
Wright, and June Lockhart. Each show had its own producer, cast, crew,
and story. Playhouse 90 started out as a live show with a live opening title
sequence: the orthicon cameras focused on large white Moravian stars
that turned around their own axes, then cut to the TV stars in the upcoming episode as they stood looking at the camera from between paper stars
hanging from visible strings. The end credits were then keyed in over a
static image of the same group of Moravian stars. That was not a Bass
design. The program eventually transitioned to videotape production,
although some shows were actually filmed, but the opening stayed pretty
much the same throughout its four seasons.66 Even reruns of the show,
hosted by Richard Boone, do not include the Bass-designed opener. So it
is unclear for what iteration of Playhouse 90 Bass created the titles found
in the Bass Collection. It is possible that the twenty-five-second Bass title
was used merely as a teaser or promo for the show.
The title begins with extremely out-of-focus lights that form perfect
circles. Traffic noise cues the viewer to the fact that these are automobile
headlights moving through urban traffic. The circles form patterns in various shades of gray, depending on the brightness of the lights, but moving
either horizontally or vertically. The dots of light start to form patterns in
straight lines, indicating that Bass has subtly switched to graphically generated white circles, as the word “PLAYHOUSE” is written with dots.
With the appearance of the title, introductory music commences—a
bouncy, going-to-the-theater melody. “PLAYHOUSE” fades out, while
larger white circles re-form to create “90” in the center of the frame.
“PLAYHOUSE” and “90” then blink alternately onscreen as if they were
Broadway lights.
Here, Bass brings together two kinds of urban light. The title opens
with nighttime automobile traffic, streetlights, and traffic noises, suggesting that people are on the move, entering the city or leaving it. These patterns of circular light are then mixed with graphic circles that are a visual

248

The Urban Landscape
trope for Broadway marquee lights, indicating that a theatrical experience
awaits the viewers of Playhouse 90. The flashing two-part title also mimics
an electronic marquee. According to a document in the Bass Papers, “The
general intent is to create an active, night-life, atmosphere reminiscent of
the visual stimuli associated with theatre-going.”67 Its simplicity of design
is its greatest strength; it is both highly abstract and concrete—hallmarks
of the Bass brand.
In fact, Bass had been playing with the idea of depicting an urban
landscape through a dot-matrix screen since his work on Edge of the City,
although only in his preferred version of the titles, not in the actual release
prints. There, Bass uses what can only be characterized as white and gray
computer punch holes overlaid onscreen to abstractly depict the urban
landscape traversed by film’s hero in the live-action images. Likewise,
Bass’s posters for the same film feature the computer punch cards; however, Bass does not yet cover the entire screen with a dot matrix to produce typography. The dot-matrix pattern communicates modernity,
whether through its association with computers or the news ticker. Creating a graphic for typography and images based solely on a dot matrix
would come with Bass’s next television project after Playhouse 90.
In the spring of 1961 the Westinghouse Corporation premiered a
ninety-minute videotaped, late-night talk show, PM East/PM West, which
was cohosted by Mike Wallace and Joyce Davidson in New York (PM
East) and Terrence O’Flaherty in San Francisco (PM West). The show premiered on 12 June 1961 on the Group W Network and was then syndicated to other television stations in Chicago, Washington, D.C., New
York, and Los Angeles. It lasted only one season (until 22 June 1962) and
failed, in part, because audiences were expecting Wallace, who was famous
for attacking and bloodying interviewees on his previous ABC talk show,
The Mike Wallace Interview (1957–1959), to do the same on this show.
However, PM East/PM West focused on show-business personalities who
had to be cajoled to appear on the program, so Wallace remained as gentle
as a lamb, causing audiences to abandon the show in droves.68 Bass may
have been contracted to do the titles through Westinghouse, which had
already used him for an advertising campaign.69
The titles for PM East/PM West survive in various forms and differ
slightly, since the show ran on both the East and West Coasts. Bass uses a
dot-matrix pattern to signify the Broadway news ticker format. Rectangular white forms on a black background are ordered in straight rows from

249

SAUL BASS
the top of the screen to the bottom. A description in the Bass Papers,
probably written after the fact but approved by Bass, has the title image
beginning with Bass’s proverbial sunset: “We open on a setting sun slowly
sinking into the horizon. As it begins to disappear, the night lights of the
city begin to wink on . . . building into the skyline configuration of New
York . . . the skyline goes higher and higher, until the light pattern covers
the screen . . . then breaks down to form ‘PM East,’ which blinks on and
off . . . as we fade into the beginning of the show.”70 Before the sun has
completely set, individual lights flash on and off and then form a suspension bridge as the suns sets beneath it. Next, the lights slowly form a
slightly abstract image of the New York skyline; the outline of the buildings grows larger as the lights continue to flash, and the shapes of the
buildings expand upward until the screen is completely filled with white
lights. Lights are then slowly extinguished from the edge of the frame
toward the center, until the image morphs into very large block letters,
“PM,” that cover the top two-thirds of the screen; “EAST” and “WEST”
appear in letters half the size, covering the lower third of the screen.
Graphically, “EAST” and “WEST” share the same “PM,” each carrying
the visual weight of the other. Yet they are also apart because although
they share the same format, they have different hosts, different lengths
(sixty versus thirty minutes), and, of course, different time zones.
These marquee lights clearly broadcast the show’s intention to entertain late-night audiences on both coasts with show-business personalities
relaxing and hopefully sharing gossip with established broadcast and print
journalists. A late-night show implies more “adult” content, as indicated
by the setting sun. City lights here are reduced to the Times Square news
ticker and the marquee lights of Broadway. But Bass is also playing with
the space created through the lights, for example, when he fills the television screen with little white lights in straight rows—a self-reflexive gesture
pointing to the medium itself and to the fact that light allows the artist to
create pictures and make art. Ironically, prior to producing the PM design,
Bass had created a more technically and aesthetically complex iteration of
the dot-matrix marquee as a trope for the glitz of Las Vegas in Ocean’s
Eleven.
Frank Sinatra hired Saul Bass to do the titles for the Frank Sinatra
Show (1957) and then hired him again in 1960 for Ocean’s Eleven. By
then, the film already had a long production history. As early as April
1956, Matador Productions announced that it would produce Ocean’s

250

The Urban Landscape
Eleven with director Gilbert L. Kay and producer Earl Colbert.71 The
project either remained dormant or could not get financing, because
actors Peter Lawford and Frank Sinatra bought the rights to the screenplay in December 1957.72 Sinatra’s Dorchester Productions and Lawford’s Kenlaw Productions were still planning to make the film nine
months later, but production had to be postponed due to Sinatra’s commitments elsewhere; meanwhile, Richard Breen was working on the
script.73 When Lewis Milestone was brought in as producer and director
sometime in 1959, he discarded much of the film’s plot but kept the basic
premise of a group of ex-army buddies robbing five Las Vegas casinos.74
With a distribution deal from Warner Brothers, the film was shot in Las
Vegas at the Sands (partially owned by Sinatra), the Sahara, and the Riviera casinos and on the Warner lot in Burbank between January and March
1960. The exceedingly complex animation needed for the titles was done
by Art Goodman, Dirk Barlow, Bill Hurtz, and Jim Hiltz. Executive producer Sinatra apparently allotted $65,000 for Bass’s titles, although,
according to a Hollywood Reporter article, titles usually cost only $2,500
to $5,000. But, as the article noted, “Frank’s gasser-type titles are animated slot machines, roulette wheels and crap tables, and that’s The Hard
Way.”75 Since the end credits are conventional images of the Rat Pack,
except for the final “The End” in white dot matrix, it is possible that the
money ran out. Again, the cost of Bass’s titles had become an issue in the
press.
Ocean’s Eleven premiered on 3 August 1960 in Las Vegas, but when
the film opened in New York and Los Angeles a week later, it received
mixed to poor reviews. Variety was charitable, as usual, pointing out that
although the film had major weaknesses, including a doubtful premise, a
contrived script, uncertain direction, and a group of actors essentially
playing themselves, it would be a moneymaker. Bass got another rave
review: “Main titles by Saul Bass are as clever as anything that follows.”76
In fact, Ocean’s Eleven became the highest-grossing film of Frank Sinatra’s
career, taking in more than $5.5 million and reaching eighth place for the
year.
The title sequence begins with an abstract white dot matrix—basically, a horizontal pattern that keeps changing shape on the Cinemascope
screen until it becomes a large “1” just to the left of the vertical axis. The
“1” slowly disappears and is replaced by a gray-green “2” slightly to the
right of the vertical axis, then by a brighter blue “3” on the extreme right

251

SAUL BASS
side of the screen, while “FRANK SINATRA” appears in white capitals on
the horizontal axis and butted up against the “3.” The titles then continue
the count, up to “11,” in pink, orange, and yellow, while the names of the
other stars (Dean Martin, Sammy Davis Jr., Peter Lawford, Angie Dickinson, and Richard Conte) are displayed in white on the horizontal axis,
ending with the film’s title. Nelson Riddle’s orchestral score brilliantly
identifies the names in lights with leitmotifs.77 Bass next creates an orange
and pink rectangular frame with multiple lines, placing the costarring
credits in white dot matrix in the center, followed by a sideways blue and
pink “8” with more actors’ credits in white in both holes of the number.
An elaborate movie marquee design by Art Goodman, which Bass reused
in black and white for The Sale of Manhattan, accompanies the centered
credits for Red Skelton and George Raft. A zigzag arrow that moves
across the full length of the wide screen in green and blue allows Bass to
place the screenplay and story credits in the black spaces in between,
before the arrow disappears. The following frame creates a pattern of vertical lines, columns, and circles that frames two face cards—the queen of
diamonds and king of hearts—while the technical credits appear in white
dot matrix over the design. Next, the design slowly disappears and is
replaced by a dot-matrix design of a slot machine; the four windows, containing a lemon, a bell, cherries, and an orange, are now solid images on
a white background. Bass lets the slot machine rip, and the images move
rapidly on their vertical wheel, coming to a stop on two cherries and the
image of a man and a woman kissing (the two right windows), before a
black window shade is pulled down over the third window and white
technical credits are seen. The slots then spin into action again, as three
blue martini glasses come up and a gray-green balloon appears in the
fourth window; the balloon rises out of frame, and a drunk holding the
string appears, followed by black credits on a white field. Again the slots
rotate, coming to a stop on four white bells in a blue square with black
technical credits below them; the fourth window states, “titles designed
by SAUL BASS.” The dot matrix then forms a highly stylized American
eagle, while the musical credits appear in three sets of circles within the
design. Finally, two solid white dice bounce onto a white dot-matrix table
and are removed by a solid croupier’s stick. Then another set of dice lands
with Lewis Milestone’s credit handwritten and printed inside the white
field. The film dissolves to a live-action shot as the dice are removed again
with the croupier’s stick.

252

The Urban Landscape
By the late 1950s, Las Vegas had become a gamblers’ paradise in the
eyes of most Americans. It was also a town dominated by the organized
crime syndicates that had built the first great postwar casinos after Nevada
legalized gambling in the 1930s. Bass plays with many Las Vegas signifiers
here, beginning with the count-up of Arabic numbers, which points to
the many casino marquees along the Vegas Strip and provides a convenient way to list all the above-the-title stars. Like the subsequent rectangular frames and curly eights, the pastel colors of the constantly moving
and changing dot-matrix patterns refer to Las Vegas’s particular kind of
gaudy ambience, reinforced by a musical theme that mimics the flashing
“lights.” In keeping with Las Vegas’s emerging reputation as an entertainment city, the end credits have the principals walk past a marquee on
which their names appear—a self-reflexive advertising moment for sure.
Of course, the playing cards and slot machine represent the very essence
of Las Vegas gambling and casino culture, but interestingly, the playingcard title reprises a similarly designed composition in Around the World in
80 Days. The slot machine design, in contrast, allows Bass to insert a few
visual jokes, one being the dropping of the window shade before a couple
engages in sexual activity, an idea he had played with in The Moon Is Blue
and Love in the Afternoon and may have been inspired by a Paul Rand
advertisement. The drunk who floats up with a balloon in one hand and
a bottle in the other is wearing a nineteenth-century black stovepipe hat,
again referencing Around the World in 80 Days. The white bells on a blue
background that pop up on the slot machine are almost identical to the
Bell Telephone logo Bass sold to AT&T as a brand-new design eight years
later.78 The abstracted blue American eagle references the fact that all the
thieves had been members of the same army unit in World War II. And
finally, the roll of the dice, which comes up first as seven and then as Milestone’s credit, may be Bass’s signature joke on the director, visualizing the
fact that every film production is a crapshoot. Like the subsequent film
narrative, the opening titles for Ocean’s Eleven are jokey, fun, and not very
deep. The animation required to create the titles, however, was technically
complex and labor intensive, given that each change in the dot matrix
necessitated a new cell. The solid images of the playing cards, slot
machines, and dice make the gambling motif more concrete and legible,
since casinos at the time were all about gambling, drinking, and sex (all
three activities referenced in the titles), unlike today, when they also advertise family tourism.

253

SAUL BASS
Casino (1995) was the fifth collaboration between Martin Scorsese
and Elaine and Saul Bass since Scorsese first rediscovered Saul in 1989,
when he saw the titles for War of the Roses.79 One of Scorsese’s favorite
films is Ocean’s Eleven, so the Basses were a natural fit for the director’s
film about Las Vegas and the Mafia’s dominance of the great casinos.
Completed in the last year of Saul’s life, the titles for Casino reveal the
extent to which he was deferring to Elaine in determining the design elements. Thus, although the typography and its placement within the screen
frame still conform to the Bass style, the preponderance of diagonals and
the abandonment of geometric design principles are likely attributable to
Elaine. Elaine Bass’s abstract symphony of Las Vegas light is an ecstatic
burst of abstract color. According to Saul, “We attempted to create a metaphor for the Las Vegas of betrayal, twisted morality, greed, hubris, and in
the end, self-destruction. The descent into Dante’s Inferno.”80 Some of
the city lights footage for Casino had in fact been shot thirty years earlier
for the Something Wild title sequence.81
Apparently, the Basses were shown the first, last, and middle reels of
Casino before designing the title sequence.82 Planning of the sequence
was well under way in September 1994, when Bass received some stock
footage of explosions. By that time, the titles’ main theme had apparently
been set, although earlier memos indicate that at some point, a much
more expansive, touristy view of Las Vegas had been considered, including images of eagles, tarantulas, sidewinder snakes, scorpions, traffic lights
(red-yellow-green), and well-known Vegas sights. A month later, Bass
sent Scorsese a memo in which he literally sketched out the “scale of body
to frame in 2:35,” as well as noting the fact that the flying body following
the car explosion would be in silhouette.83 Postproduction work apparently occurred in June 1995, with final approval for the title cards coming
in October. The total cost for the Casino main title sequence, credits, and
end credits was $111,316.56, not including the fees for the services of
Saul and Elaine Bass. In a letter to Barbara De Fina, Scorsese’s producer,
Bass outlined the reasons for the high cost. In particular, he maintained
that a lot of experimentation was necessary to manufacture a continuous
fireball out of only two seconds of explosion. Utilizing an Avid System,
they created “twelve 2–3 second units which collapse into 18–20 seconds,
due to overlapping dissolves, flops and different framings, etc.”84 Another
problem seems to have been the scale and trajectory of the flying figure,
which had to be achieved optically with the eighteen to twenty seconds of

254

The Urban Landscape
footage they had at their disposal. The conception of the sequence had
apparently been worked out well before production began, since much of
the discussion seems to have been about finding a proper font for the
titles.
Opening simultaneously in New York and Los Angeles on 22 November 1995, Casino was not viewed as an unqualified success. Indeed,
although many reviewers acknowledged Scorsese as America’s greatest living director and noted that the film’s strengths (e.g., the explosive violence, the intensity of emotion) are present in all his work, they complained
that Scorsese had covered this territory before. Speaking of the actors’
performances, Mick LaSalle observed in the San Francisco Chronicle: “De
Niro and Pesci are good, but this time they know they’re good, and the
inspiration is gone. They have one eye on us and one affectionate eye
on themselves.”85 Janet Maslin in the New York Times and Peter Travers
in Rolling Stone focused more on the film’s journalistic aspects, both noting that Nicholas Pileggi’s book and script detail the rise and fall of Mafia
influence in the Las Vegas casinos in the 1970s and early 1980s and that
Scorsese was interested in depicting a historical canvas rather than individual fates. Maslin wrote: “With its rivers of cash and mountains of neon,
its high rollers and lowlife hoods, ‘Casino’ luxuriantly explores the anatomy of America’s gaudiest (and now most cinematically popular)
playground.”86
Casino’s nearly three-minute title sequence begins with a black screen
and white sans serif typography announcing the production company and
informing viewers that it is a true story from 1983. Ace Rothstein (Robert
De Niro) is then seen leaving a casino and is heard speaking offscreen:
“When you love someone, you gotta trust them. There is no other way.
. . . And for a while, that’s the kind of love I had.” He gets into his car and
turns on the ignition, and the car explodes in a fireball. As the above-thetitle credits for Scorsese, De Niro, and Sharon Stone fade in, Rothstein’s
body hurls through an inferno of flames, which dissolves to the red lights
of a Las Vegas marquee; the body continues to fall as Joe Pesci’s name
fades in. The film’s title card follows, with “Casino” moving diagonally up
the screen while staying on a horizontal line. The remaining major actors’
credits, as well as credits for the major behind-the-scenes talent, fade in
and out on a changing array of abstract compositions of pure color, crafted
from cutout views of the Las Vegas Strip light shows. The lights transition
back to red, and the camera pans down an arched grid, as the falling body

255

SAUL BASS
and the flames reappear for Barbara De Fina’s producer’s credit; the screen
dissolves to pure flames for Scorsese’s director credit, before the image
dissolves to the interior of a casino and Ace Rothstein’s narration.
Elaine and Saul’s design concept consists of two elements, with the
first bracketing the second: the flying body of Ace Rothstein after the
explosion and the marquee lights of Las Vegas. Rothstein’s body falling
through an inferno of fire marks the Jewish gangster’s descent into hell’s
flames. Wearing an intense coral-orange sports jacket, shirt, and tie with
white pants and shoes, Rothstein is visually divided in the first shot—an
innocent angel with one foot in hell. With the explosion, his body tumbles through the flames in a diagonal but steadily downward trajectory,
finally entering the visual space of Las Vegas, which is both glitzy, thanks
to the colored lights, and a marker of hell, with red arches of light. The
human body falling through the flames clearly references the iconography
of medieval paintings of souls being sucked into hell’s fire, as in Hans
Memling’s triptych The Last Judgment (1467), the Limbourg brothers’
illustration Hell (circa 1412), or Duc de Berry’s Book of Hours. Finally, the
diagonal movement of the body from the upper left to the lower right sets
up an arc that is reversed in the following movement of the film title and
the lights behind it, the casino being the mechanism for the hero’s rise
before his fall. The movement of the body also connects the vision of hell
to another kind of hell—namely, the Las Vegas Strip. The intense reds of
the Las Vegas lights as Joe Pesci’s name appears onscreen identify his character as another one of the fallen, as is the character played by Sharon
Stone. When the flames return near the end of the title sequence, so too
does the body falling through space, although now the movement is
much more vertical than diagonal, and the flames themselves are in closeup, almost identical to the flames in the last frames of the Exodus titles.87
But here the flames are seemingly more abstract, similar to the white cloth
in War of the Roses—that is, more for the sake of pure design than semantic content. Is Scorsese placing himself in the same hell as his characters?
The Christian (specifically, Catholic) interpretation of these opening
images of the descent into hell is reinforced by the sound track. At the
moment of the explosion, Bass cuts to the final chorale from Johann
Sebastian Bach’s St. Matthew Passion (1727), which is called Wir setzen
uns mit Tränen nieder. Bach may have been a devout Lutheran, but the
music, text, and images in the chorale speak of death and exhaustion, not
the redemption that Christian theology teaches. Here, the grave, visual-

256

The Urban Landscape
ized through the horizontal lines of Rothstein’s vehicle, morphs a moment
later into the driver’s funeral pyre. As in Billy Wilder’s Sunset Boulevard
(1950), the central character seemingly narrates from beyond the grave
via Bach’s libretto:
Wir setzen uns mit Tränen nieder und rufen dir im Grabe zu:
Ruhe sanfte, sanfte ruh! Ruht, ihr ausgesogenen Glieder!
Euer Grab und Leichenstein soll dem ängstlichen Gewissen ein
bequemes Ruhekissen und der Seelen Ruhstatt sein. Höchst
vergnügt schlummern da die Augen ein.
We sit down with you in tears, call to you in your grave:
Rest gently, gently rest! Rest you exhausted limbs
Your grave and tombstone for our fearful conscience shall be
a comfortable pillow, and the place where our souls find
rest with the greatest content, there our eyes will close in sleep.
Indeed, all the principal characters—Rothstein, his partner Nicky Santoro, and his wife Ginger—are “sinners,” committing larceny, murder,
and adultery, respectively. And they will all die—or at least that is the supposition after seeing Rothstein blown up. The religious music elevates the
intensity of the light’s color scheme, translating the images into the emotional intensity of the moment, which subsequently morphs into a secular
ecstasy.
The diagonal movement of the abstract light show in the title frame,
with the title typography also moving on a diagonal trajectory, is unique
in the Bass canon and can probably be attributed to Elaine’s influence, as
can the abstract light play. The Basses present close-up compositions of
marquee lights in such a way as to make their texts illegible and thereby
abstract. Ironically, the film’s formalist center can also be seen as a tribute
to the abstract color films of Jordan Belson, the Whitney brothers, and
Moholy-Nagy. The lights of this city take on an almost otherworldly quality, like a surreal dream or a Zen exercise. Thus, the red and yellow light
play that accompanies James Woods’s credit seemingly references computer data (long before The Matrix), whereas the purple and orange lights
for Kevin Pollack and L. Q. Jones, respectively, duplicate the Broadway
news ticker seen in so many other Bass titles; these have become pure
indexical signs of urbanity, but they still adhere to a spatial geometry

257

SAUL BASS
based on the x- and y-axes. Subsequent titles vacillate between predominantly blue light and red light—between heaven and hell. Some frames
feature rainbow light, such as the Elaine and Saul Bass credit; this makes
sense, given that rainbows were central to the Bass/Yager corporate logo
and design. But the title then morphs again into an electronic version of
Paul Klee’s fields of abstract color, recalling the Bass of yore. Thelma
Schoonmaker’s credit is dominated by diagonal shafts of red light from
the right, as if it were streaming in through the windows of a Gothic
cathedral, while Pileggi’s book credit, in diagonal blue light, is reminiscent of Leni Riefenstahl’s monumental Lichtsäulen at Nuremberg, which
also created cathedrals of light. Indeed, eight of the thirteen light compositions (62 percent) incorporate diagonal lines—a staggering number,
given the dearth of such compositions in Bass’s earlier work.
Light and color are expressions of emotion, but here, the emotions
(like the light) remain on the surface. The primary colors are intense but
too abstract to function as motors of empathy, just as the film’s narrative
seemingly lacks any inner depth. Rothstein’s suits in rainbow colors are
the only available insight into his character. Ironically, the overall montage
of successive light compositions contrasts large areas of screen color: blue
versus rainbow prisms of light; red, blue, and black diagonal stripes. The
privileging of rounded edges and the repetition of line, shape, and color
follow a more rhythmic logic than the strict geometric patterns prevalent
in most of Bass’s other work. Like The Age of Innocence, Casino’s title
sequence marks the evolution of the Bass brand to one that expresses
Elaine’s more rounded and (dare I say) more feminine design sense.

The Sale of Manhattan
The Sale of Manhattan (1962), Saul Bass and Art Goodman’s short animated film, takes us back to Bass’s original style and humor, while conforming to an image of New York City that emphasizes Broadway. Stan
Freberg wrote the script, and the film was produced as a segment for his
ABC special, Stan Freberg Presents the Chun King Chow Mein Hour: Salute
to the Chinese New Year, which was originally broadcast on 4 February
1962. The skit had previously appeared on a record album, Stan Freberg
Presents the United States of America: The Early Years.88 The five-minute
animated film tells a humorous version of the sale of the island of Manhattan in 1626 to Peter Minuit, director general of the New Netherland col-

258

The Urban Landscape
ony, for sixty Dutch guilders, or approximately $1,000 (not the $24 of
legend). However, according to a caption accompanying twenty frames
reproduced in a design publication, “This film, entitled The Sale of Manhattan, is a musical parody on the historic transaction whereby the island
of Manhattan was sold by the Red Indians to Peter Stuyvesant [sic], then
Governor of New York, for the paltry sum of 24 dollars.”89 Although Freberg’s show got mixed reviews, the animation received some favorable
comments: “The program had its better moments, a Sid Caesarian operation involving old movie clichés had several good funnies, . . . and even an
animated version of the sale of Manhattan Island.”90
In the film, a typical Jewish, cigar-smoking New York talent agent
negotiates the sale of Manhattan between a cigar-store Indian and a Dutch
straight man. It opens with a very large Native American chief perched on
a pedestal with wheels, standing next to a coonskin cap–wearing pioneer
who ostensibly owns the store. They meet a Dutchman with a heavy
accent who says he saw a listing in the paper for the sale of the island. The
store owner offers to do all the talking for the Indian, and when the colonist asks about the price, the “agent” shuts up his client and changes into
a suit and a bowler hat, now looking more like a nineteenth-century Jewish merchant. When the Dutchman sees the forest covering the island, he
says $32.50 in junk jewelry is too much to pay and walks away, but the
agent pulls him back and says the island may not look like much now, but
someday. . . . Behind them, rectangles suddenly turn into a skyscraper skyline; then the lights of the marquees for the Roxy, Paramount, Empire,
and State theaters appear. The agent trades his bowler for a top hat as a
chorus line of squaws dances in the background. As the agent dances with
a line of male and half-naked female dancers, the Dutchman agrees to the
sale, whereupon the agent has the trees hauled away. When the Dutchman asks what’s happening to the trees, he’s told that he didn’t pay for a
furnished island. The last laugh is on him, the Indian says, because the
whole island is solid concrete. All three ride a freight elevator down to
below street level as Bass cuts to a furious live-action montage of New
York traffic.
Utilizing the simple line drawing style that was a hallmark of Art
Goodman’s animation, The Sale of Manhattan plays with both history and
the viewer’s knowledge of present-day Manhattan, the humor arising over
the postmodern clash of various subject positions. Knowing that they are
reproducing a legend—the Ur-myth of the great city’s founding—rather

259

SAUL BASS
than a historical reality, Bass and Freberg consciously traffic in ethnic stereotypes that were common fixtures in early-twentieth-century vaudeville
but probably offended many when the program aired in 1962. A case in
point is the Native American, who is visualized as the cliché European
Americans made of him: a giant in a loincloth whose feet are glued
together to maintain the cigar-store pose. The “Red Indian” towers over
both the agent and the colonist, his physical presence emphasized by his
sizable naked chest—a threat on many fronts. But he is symbolically castrated, immobilized, dependent on others to push him around, which
may have been a point worth making for liberal humanists like Freberg
and Bass, given the abject poverty and lack of opportunity for Native
Americans at the time.
The Dutch colonist looks like a historical figure, but he has the accent
and personality of a “Dutch” vaudevillian comedian, who was really a cliché of the slow-witted German immigrant. The Dutchman gets to play
the straight man, and it seems to be a natural fit. Small and very round,
the Dutchman eats well but is frugal. However, as the narrative demonstrates, he is also susceptible to erotic visual pleasure. So he buys the island
but realizes, after its defoliation, that it won’t attract any colonists. He,
like the cigar-store Indian, is a character in a giant vaudeville show that
slips into burlesque.
The joke in the master narrative is that it is the Jewish impresario who
literally directs the historical events (by dominating the deal) and the
vaudevillian performance (consisting of a comedy routine, followed by a
big musical number, and then more comedy). A foundational myth of the
United States, involving the civilizing European and the noble savage, is
played out in 1626 Manhattan, but it has a so-called alien—a Jewish
immigrant and Lower East Side street peddler—transforming himself (as
did Louis B. Mayer, Harry Cohen, Marcus Loew, Carl Laemmle, and others) into the quintessential Broadway agent Roxy Rothapfel, orchestrating
the show. Throwing off his camouflage, the Jewish character changes into
his bowler just when the Dutchman asks about sale price. But he is also
the architect of New York’s identity as the capital of musical theater,
another cliché transposed to the 1600s and visualized by the new impresario. His next costume change to top hat and tails introduces the musical
show, including a burlesque finale of close-ups of very round behinds.
And indeed, the lights of Broadway and their potential for spectacle (i.e.,
visual pleasure) seduce the colonist into making the purchase. Eroticism,

260

The Urban Landscape
or the satisfaction of the male gaze, closes the deal. The show then closes
down, leaving only a final ethnic slur. The colonist realizes that the whole
island is concrete, the trees merely props that can be carted off the Broadway stage at a moment’s notice. The image of concrete feeds into Middle
American prejudices about the city, summed up by the wooden Indian:
“Nice place to visit, but who would want to live here?” Somewhat disconcertingly, the Jewish agent, created by liberal Jews, can be understood to
represent all the prejudices of WASP Americans living in the hinterlands
and their belief that New York City is dominated by Jews who will sell you
anything and cheat you on top of it. One wonders how much of this was
a form of self-loathing, not uncommon among Jewish intellectuals,
reflecting the feelings of the transplanted westerner Saul Bass.

National Bohemian Beer
Bass’s visualization of urban landscapes is invariably architectural, graphic,
macrocosmic, and metaphoric. Whether a bird’s-eye view from above, as
in West Side Story or Alcoa Premiere, or from street level, it is all about the
movement of traffic, as in Something Wild or Why Man Creates, of people
as mass. Nowhere do we see individualized faces in the crowd. His city
lights work to abstract the urban environment even further, obliterating
natural space and reducing it to the metaphor of theatrical entertainment
and colored light shows. Human beings, if they are visible at all, are visualized as a mass—pedestrians crossing the street, entering and leaving
office buildings, on the move. With his “Andy Parker aka Regular Joe”
television commercials for National Bohemian beer, Bass places an individual identity at the center of his urban landscape for the first time, but
he keeps Andy invisible. Instead, the audience sees the spaces where Andy
works and plays. Bass takes the camera to actual inhabited environments,
but he shows merely a microcosmic view of interiors, as contrasted to the
public macrocosmic view of West Side Story.
Bass’s first assignment for National Bohemian was redesigning the
label for its twelve-ounce bottle. He also completed a series of wordless
newspaper and magazine advertisements for the company that used only
pictographs. Photographs of various men, both blue collar and white collar, were placed on a white background; above them are dialogue bubbles
to which the subject is adding bottles of National Bohemian beer. The
dialogue bubbles also appeared in ads in which pairs of men are engaged

261

SAUL BASS
in some activity, such as bowling, and four more ads in which a heterogeneous couple is doing household chores, such as washing the dishes or
painting.91 Bass next produced a series of television commercials for
National Bohemian (1957), one-minute spots called “Lights Out,” “Peanut,” and “Don’t Touch that Dial,” all of which play with the fact that
National Bohemian’s light beer had to be brewed in the dark.92 A second
set of National Bohemian commercials (1963–1965) was released in oneand two-minute versions and featured Andy Parker aka Regular Joe. Bass
would later direct commercials for Rainier beer (1966), but the authorship of Olympia beer commercials (1970s) in the Bass Collection is in
doubt.93
Like the Mennen Baby Magic commercials, the Andy Parker National
Bohemian beer commercials are all about parts rather than wholes.94 The
one-minute spot begins with a close-up of a clock and the off-camera
speaker announcing, “It’s the end of a working day.” Next, Bass cuts
together images of hands as they shut down an office—covering a typewriter, closing a file drawer, hanging up a phone, and so forth. Andy
Parker is introduced as a white-collar office worker, but we see only the
back of his head, his feet as he walks out the door, and his hands as he pays
for a newspaper. The camera follows him as he walks down the street past
a sign announcing the sale of mechanical toy dogs, making him “wonder
if Tommy would like a toy.” Next we see the man’s reflection in a store
window as the announcer chirps, “He knows a store window was made to
straighten ties.” The man enters through a steel door, and the commercial
dissolves to a close-up of beer being poured into a tall glass, then cuts to
a silhouette of the man at the bar as the bartender puts the glass in front
of him. The next shot dissolves to a close-up of the bartender’s hand wiping the counter as the announcer states, “Andy Parker knows the value of
a good day’s work.” The final shots zooms in on a bottle of National
Bohemian beer as Andy walks out the door in the background and the
announcer concludes, “Like you, he knows the taste of quality. Maybe like
Andy Parker you’ll enjoy National Bohemian beer. That taste of pleasant
living at the end of the day.”
The Andy Parker–Regular Joe commercial is a film of body parts that
creates a narrative surrounding the tired office worker having a quick beer
before facing traffic and the kids at home. In the office, Bass creates a
montage of hands, feet, and torsos from the secretarial pool, their purses
and high heels the markers of their gender. Andy Parker is never seen in a

262

The Urban Landscape
frontal shot; rather, the camera catches the back of his head, his hands,
arms, and feet, as he strolls through the cityscape. Even the city itself is
not shown in long shots with the architectural sweep of North by Northwest; rather, it is depicted through urban way stations—the newspaper
stand, the shop window, a street vendor, the local watering hole—spots
rather than vistas. Later in the bar, which is typically dark, the white-collar
worker is recognizable only by his suit and tie; his face is in shadows, his
body merely a shadow as he walks back out into the light to face his commute after a moment of alcoholic respite. The television viewer thus sees
and experiences the city from the point of view of the commuter, the camera functioning as a surrogate for both subject and object. Here, then,
Bass is attempting to negotiate viewer identification with the office worker
by keeping the latter’s individuality indistinct and by placing the viewer in
his position.
“The taste of pleasant living” had been National Bohemian beer’s
advertising slogan for decades, but here, Bass modernizes the brand by
jettisoning its mascot—a one-eyed cartoon figure named Natty Boh that
had been designed in 1936—and by implying that the beer is perfect for
the new postwar, urban, gray-flannel-suit crowd. Indeed, a two-minute
version of the same commercial does nothing more than add visual details,
while making it clear that Andy Parker is a stereotype, one of thousands of
male commuters who leave the office after a hard day’s work, making the
point with an image of swishing briefcases flying past the camera. Andy
Parker is an urban flaneur, taking an indirect route to his suburban commuter train, tarrying at shop windows, and relaxing with a beer. In the
longer version, Bass interpolates shots of men and women exiting an elevator as the door opens, feet and legs standing at a pedestrian crosswalk
waiting for the light to change, and several commuters drinking beer and
eating popcorn in the bar while the announcer intones, “The companionship of others who know the taste of quality.”95 Finally, the visual contrast
between the light outside and the darkness inside the bar references
another set of much shorter National Bohemian beer commercials (thirtysecond spots) that Bass produced.96 These spots were based on the notion
of the beer achieving greatness by being brewed in the dark but drunk in
the light, with a match or candle illuminating the National Bohemian
label.
The narrative structure of the Andy Parker National Bohemian beer
commercials is built around a journey from the office to the local bar and

263

SAUL BASS
then, by implication, home to the wife and kids. The subject is visualized
as a series of images of body parts that act as metonymies for the whole.
Bass and his client believed their audience consisted of a suburban, whitecollar, mostly male workforce that was not averse to having a beer at the
local bar after work. The trek through the city at rush hour is communicated through specific way stations that isolate the subject, rather than
showing him in the crowd. The narrative trope of a journey must have
fascinated Bass, because he used it again and again in his credit sequences,
commercials, and films, often imbued with a sense of discovery. Indeed,
the journey allows the traveler to see a multitude of things and environments and, ideally, to acquire knowledge in the process.

264

6

Journeys of Discovery
Seeing Is Knowledge
A journey takes one to new places and allows one to see new things.
Travel broadens horizons, changes perspectives, forces new points of view
through the unavoidable confrontation with previously unknown geographies, environments, and peoples through the simple act of perception.
Seeing is therefore a form of knowledge. Travel (whether actual or virtual)
and acquisition of knowledge about the world are indelibly linked. We
tend to forget that before the twentieth century, individuals who were not
members of the ruling class rarely traveled and had few concepts of what
the world looked like beyond their own horizon. The invention of the
railroad in the nineteenth century began to democratize travel and made
it much faster and more convenient as well. Steamships and better road
systems also did their part. Almost simultaneously, the invention of photography in the mid-nineteenth century further changed perceptions of
the world. Indeed, the age of modern travel and the birth of photographic
media occurred at roughly the same moment in history, and both became
primary manifestations of modernity.
The late-nineteenth-century advent of cinema and the automobile
also occurred simultaneously, and both inventions accelerated the collapse
of space and time. The world suddenly seemed much smaller. News and
images that once took months, even years, to reach the masses were now
available within a matter of days. The images may have been in black and
white, but they moved. The earliest cinema audiences hungered for scenes
of street life in New York, Paris, Moscow, Tokyo, and Jerusalem; the sugar
fields of Cuba; the rubber plantations of Malaysia; the coal mines of Birmingham; and contemporary events such as the funeral of President

265

SAUL BASS
McKinley, the coronation of Czar Nicholas II, and the Boxer Rebellion.
All this and more were captured by the first cameramen of Auguste and
Louis Lumiere, who fanned out over the globe between 1896 and 1900
to shoot exotic and everyday sights; they screened the work on location to
finance the journey and then sent the material back to Paris for worldwide
distribution. The cinema brought a cornucopia of new sights in rapid succession, just as the experience of the urban landscape had. The cinema was
a child not only of technology but also of rapid and largely unchecked
urbanization. In the great cities of New York, Paris, and London, speed
manifested itself in a time lapse of perception due to the compression of
space, whereby humans, architecture, and traffic created a chaos of conflicting movement. The fragmentation of seeing resulted in a changed
vision that not only transformed modernist art but also influenced early
cinema’s depiction of those phenomena.1 The express purpose of Albert
Kahn’s Archives de la Planète was to collect travel film and photographic
documents as a form of knowledge.
Saul Bass realized very early on the potential of the journey as a narrative device for both his titles and his films. Travel invariably involves a
goal, both geographic and conceptual, but more often than not, the journey itself is the goal, as if the mere accomplishment of the quest leads to
the acquisition of knowledge. This is certainly true for Saul and Elaine
Bass’s most mature manifestation of the travel narrative in Quest, where
the completion of the journey leads magically and inexplicably to enlightenment. However, it is also true for Bass’s previous short films and his title
sequences, even if, in those cases, knowledge of the world seems more a
by-product of than the raison d’être for the quest. Indeed, during such
journeys, knowledge is gained sequentially and serendipitously, like Walter Benjamin’s urban flaneur or like Bass’s boy walking along the beach.

Titles on the Move
By the 1970s, having a character on the move in the title sequence, either
leaving for or arriving from somewhere else, had become cliché. Such title
sequences could introduce the characters or even create identities, while
keeping the plot on hold until the title sequence ended and the story
proper began. In the late 1980s, when Elaine and Saul Bass first returned
to creating credit sequences, they produced a number of titles that
employed this strategy but were, for the most part, too nondescript to

266

Journeys of Discovery
even be recognized as Bass titles. For example, the titles for Big (1988,
Penny Marshall) feature a twelve-year-old boy walking home from school,
giving few indications in terms of style and content that Saul Bass designed
them. The same can be said for the Basses’ titles for Doc Hollywood (1991,
Michael Caton-Jones) and A Bronx Tale (1993, Robert De Niro),
although in the latter, an opening montage of wise guys hanging out on
street corners in the Bronx, precisely cut to the tune of Dion and the Belmonts’ “I Wonder Why” (1958), bears Saul’s unmistakable signature,
especially in terms of its repetitive motion. It had not always been so.
When Saul Bass created his first title sequences in the mid-1950s, the
trope of the journey had not yet ossified into a cliché.
Ironically, Bass’s title sequence for Martin Ritt’s Edge of the City
(1957), his first to use the narrative trope of the journey, also inserts his
typical designs for graphic city lights over the live-action images. Bass thus
doubles the view of New York City, showing the Manhattan skyline at
night in the live-action journey, and using abstract white rectangles to
symbolize the city between the typography. This bifurcation of the urban
environment may refer to the moral choices the hero must make. Indeed,
the ferryboat ride in the dark takes the central character to his future
workplace, where, over the course of the narrative, he will grow in moral
stature—standing “ten feet tall,” in the words of one character—because
he has stood up to evil while remaining true to his friend and colleague.
Edge of the City is based on a teleplay, “A Man Is Ten Feet Tall,” written by Robert Alan Aurthur, directed by Robert Mulligan, and broadcast
on NBC’s Philco Television Playhouse on 2 October 1955. David Susskind,
who produced the teleplay with Aurthur, took the project to MetroGoldwyn-Mayer for a big-screen version. (He was hoping to repeat the
theatrical success of Marty, another Philco show. Originally broadcast in
May 1953 at the end of the program’s sixth season, Marty became a huge
box-office hit in April 1955, eventually winning an Oscar for Ernest Borgnine.) Sidney Poitier, who received his first costar billing in Edge of the
City, was the only actor to be carried over from the television production,
and his performance marked the first time an African American starred in
a dramatic role on American television. Poitier was paid only $15,000,
while blacklisted director Martin Ritt earned a mere $10,000. These
extremely miserly salaries reflected the fact that the studio was not willing
to budget more than $500,000 for the production because of its racial
content. Shot on location in the Bronx and Harlem, the film ran into

267

SAUL BASS
trouble with the Motion Picture Production Code Administration because
of the possible homosexuality of the central character, Alex Nordman,
played by John Cassavetes. According to internal memos, the Breen office
asked that at least two scenes be changed because they communicated the
hero’s “almost psychopathic aversion to women.”2
The film received rave reviews from a preview audience, and even the
reviews in the mainstream New York press were very positive, complimenting the liberal-minded producers, all of whom were first-time filmmakers. Calling it a “courageous, thought-provoking and exciting film,”
the critic for Variety noted that despite the interracial relationship at the
heart of the narrative, it was not a film “about the Negro problem.”3 Bosley Crowther in the New York Times also considered the film an earnest
effort but thought the drama too often fell into the patterns of American
television, while the story itself was too imitative of On the Waterfront
(1953).4 According to the Village Voice, the film had qualities reminiscent
of the best Italian Neorealist films and was an important example of Hollywood’s attempt to insert some social significance into its products; however, it was marred by a “happy ending” that allowed the weak hero to
defeat the bully who was twice his size.5
The black-and-white titles for Edge of the City open with Alex Nordman (Cassavetes), dressed in work clothes, running toward the camera as
a metal gate is being closed. Alex jumps the barrier and leaps onto the
ferry, just as it is pulling away from the dock into the night. As “MetroGoldwyn-Mayer Presents” appears in white lettering on the screen, Alex
strolls out onto the deck in silhouette, lighting a cigarette against the New
York skyline, followed by the film’s title in Times New Roman font, with
“Edge” just below the horizontal axis, “of” just above, and “the City”
twelve points below the axis. The words appear individually and disappear
the same way, replaced by the names of the costars, Cassavetes and Poitier,
in caps well below the axis; at the same time, graphic lights are stacked
vertically, forming what can be interpreted as three high-rise buildings.
The supporting players’ names appear in right-justified caps, screen right,
as does the screenwriter credit, while the camera tracks the ferryboat passing through the night, accompanied by changing patterns of white rectangles. Having reached the shore, Alex crosses the railroad tracks and
walks up a ramp as the musical and technical credits appear, including
“Titles designed by Saul Bass,” with more rectangles to the right of the
left-justified credits. Surprisingly, for the final credits for Susskind and

268

Journeys of Discovery
Ritt, the white rectangles form horizontal lines as borders for the names
as Alex walks back down the rail-yard ramp (having asked for directions,
one assumes), past the camera, and toward the door of an office.
The serif typography shoots out from the screen as if typed, reinforcing the film’s journalistic aspects: it tells a socially critical story, ripped
from the headlines. Carrying a bag, Alex Nordman is clearly in a hurry as
he barely makes it onto the departing ferry traversing the East River, as
the skyline in the background indicates. The silhouetted figure might
indicate that he is a person with a dark past, one who has made poor moral
choices and now hopes to correct them. However, with his face in shadows, except for a brief pass by the camera at the end of the title sequence,
Alex remains a solitary working-class figure, facing the lights of the city
and a dark industrial landscape. The city’s contours and character are
unknowable in the darkness, allowing the audience to question what is to
come, just as Alex may be doing in his reverie. The long tracking shot of
the ferry focuses on the narrative on a journey, although the boat itself is
hardly visible in the darkness; its interior lights form a horizontal pattern
that is distinguishable from the lights of New York in the background only
by its movement. The ferry lights are mirrored later in the white rectangles accompanying the producer credits. Clearly, the abstract graphic
forms presented with the credits are the title’s most interesting innovation, although they are missing from release prints in circulation.6 Saul
Bass himself had a somewhat elaborate and complicated explanation for
the use of these graphic forms:
Against the live-action background play a series of animated rectangles. At the beginning, they create a sense of “drive” (as the
protagonist runs down the pathway to a ferry) by popping on and
off the screen in long, horizontal patterns. Later (as the figure
crosses the river on the ferry) they assume a symbolic representation of the lights of the Manhattan skyscrapers as they flicker on
and off the screen. They once again resume the horizontal “drive”
character (as he moves through the freight yard on the other side
of the river) interspersed with random flickering “thought” patterns near his head. Finally, they lead us visually to the bright light
of the hiring office door and end as our story begins.
While such an interpretation may have been clear in the designer’s mind,

269

SAUL BASS
it was probably not so apparent to contemporary audiences; they were
already attempting to read the live-action images and the credits, leaving
little cognitive energy to analyze the graphic permutations of the abstract
forms. Only in the middle, when the background is less busy, can the rectangles be read as abstract reflections of the skyline.
The key to the graphic element may be in Bass’s poster design. His
posters for Edge of the City (the one-sheet, three-sheet, and half-sheet) all
feature a pencil drawing of a man running on Bass’s signature red background. The man’s torso is cut off at the chest by the top of the image,
while a much smaller woman is seen running behind him. Although the
red background gives no sense of perspective, the size of the figures creates perspective; this is reinforced by small yellow rectangles in the background, making it appear as if they are running away from the city. The
film’s title below is laid out architecturally, as if it is another building, but
it also balances the composition. The poster thus communicates that the
story takes place at the edge of the city, which is true in the sense that it
is set in the rail yards, away from the city center. Interestingly, in the
three-sheet version, the male protagonist is cut off a bit lower, revealing
that he is wearing a tie, which misrepresents his status as a member of the
working class. The poster clearly identifies the rectangles as city lights.
Therefore, the doubling of the city lights in the titles may be understood
as a visualization of the contrast between the harsh reality of the city and
the idealized graphic version. Likewise, there is the protagonist’s moral
choice between facing the reality of his situation as an army deserter and
bringing his friend’s killer to justice, and holding on to the illusion that
he can live outside of social reality. The titles thereby reflect the deeply
political choices the socially conscious filmmakers are offering their
protagonist.
While the titles for Edge of the City visualize a journey in an urban
environment, Bass’s titles for William Wyler’s The Big Country (1958)
depict an endless journey through the nineteenth-century American West.
The titles communicate the slowness of travel, rather than speed. Attempting to visualize the isolation of the ranching community that is the locale
for the film’s narrative, Bass focuses on a stagecoach, which is dwarfed by
the endless landscape of the American plains. As Bass states in Bass on
Titles: “I tried to establish the notion of an island of people in a sea of
land, the vastness of which is penetrated by a stagecoach. After an endless
journey it reaches this isolated people and only then does the story begin.”

270

Journeys of Discovery
A year later he admitted that critics had told him the Big Country titles
were nice but not very Bass-like.7
The Big Country, a big-budget western epic, was based on the novel
Ambush at Blanco Canyon by Donald Hamilton, which had been serialized in the Saturday Evening Post in February 1957. It is the story of a
feud between two families over water rights in the parched high plains of
the American West. No fewer than five writers were credited on the movie
script, although there were actually seven writers, including Leon Uris.8
Apparently, none of them delivered a satisfactory script, forcing the team
to begin production without one.9 Bass was brought in during preproduction in April 1957, after Gregory Peck told Leon Roth of United Artists that he wanted to hire Bass: “He will design trade ads, newspaper and
magazine ads, billboards, special stationery, invitations, various announcements, etc. He will undertake to find a keynote or trade-mark by which
the picture can be readily identified. And, he will design the titles for the
picture.”10 Shot on location at the Drais Ranch near Stockton, California,
and at Red Rock Canyon, Jawbone Canyon, and the Mojave Desert, as
well as at the Goldwyn studios, the film was in production from 30 July
to 18 November 1957.11 The location shooting devoured $35,000 a day,
and the whole film was completed at a cost of $3.1 million, making it one
of the most expensive westerns ever produced.12 The film was formatted
in the relatively new Technirama process, which, like VistaVision, utilized
an eight-perforation, horizontal anamorphic image at a ratio of 2.25:1; it
was then reduced to 2.35:1 on 35mm and stretched to 2.21:1 on 70mm
road-show prints with a stereo track, the latter sold as Super Technirama
70.13 Bass employed the second unit in Stockton to get the images he
needed for the title sequence.14 The film opened at the Astor in New York
on 1 October 1958.
Due to its huge costs and a first-run gross of only $4 million, The Big
Country broke even but hardly produced any income for Peck and Wyler,
who were each entitled to 25 percent of the profits.15 It did earn a Best
Supporting Actor Oscar for Burl Ives and a nomination for its music, but
little else. It was, however, the top box-office performer in the United
Kingdom in 1959. Critic W. R. Wilkerson actually predicted that the film
would lose money because its extreme length prohibited speedy audience
turnover, resulting in lower ticket sales.16 Bosley Crowther complained
that this was the most bellicose and violent film about peace ever made,
thereby referencing Peck’s and Wyler’s previous pacifist outing in Friendly

271

SAUL BASS
Persuasion (1956).17 Another critic also cited the pacifist angle as a way of
blowing up the film into a “long and ambitious western” but concluded,
“for the most part the approach is pedestrian and superficial.”18 Time
magazine, in contrast, called the film “a starkly beautiful, carefully written
classic western that demands comparison to Shane.”19 None of the reviewers chose to comment on Bass’s titles.
Saul Bass was hired to do both the titles and some of the publicity. He
produced what was apparently intended to be the film’s logo: a huge yellow sun, painted in the style of Van Gogh, on an orange background. The
high art connection was purposeful, given that the studio was marketing
the film as an arty western with major stars, not as a Saturday matinee
“oater.” The logo appeared on Bass’s B-style one-sheet, the half-sheet, a
Japanese re-release poster from 1966, the sound-track album, and the
press book, while the majority of the United Artists publicity featured
head and body images of the large cast of stars.20 Like the titles, all the
Bass images are composed to emphasize the vastness of the landscape in
relation to the tiny stagecoach on the horizon. The large sun logo and the
horizon are placed in the bottom quarter of the frame, while orange sky
fills the remaining space above.
Taking advantage of the wide screen, Bass opens the titles with a
racing stagecoach pulled by six horses and with two riders atop it. The
image fills the length of the screen and moves left; the camera holds the
composition as “UNITED ARTISTS PRESENTS” appears in white
sans serif capitals, justified screen right. Credits in a slightly larger sans
serif font with shadow highlights for Gregory Peck, Jean Simmons, and
Carroll Baker follow on the same line, just above the horizontal axis, as
does the credit for Charlton Heston, as the image cuts to a close-up of
thundering horses’ hooves. The shot continues for William Wyler’s
above-the-title credit just below the horizontal axis, then cuts to a widescreen vista of the open landscape; the stagecoach and horses are dwarfed
on a road that traverses the frame at the horizontal axis, as the film’s title
appears below. The stagecoach continues its journey on the road for
Burl Ives’s and Charles Bickford’s credits, then dissolves very slowly to
a high-angle close-up of the giant moving wagon wheel; the axle is at
the frame’s exact center, and credits for the supporting cast appear on
the horizontal axis and then justified in a column at screen left. For the
script and musical credits, Bass again dissolves to an extreme long shot
of the stagecoach, meandering toward the camera; this dissolves again to

272

Journeys of Discovery
a close-up of the horses’ legs for Franz Planer’s credit as cinematographer. The remaining technical credits fade in and out, while Bass utilizes
long dissolves between extreme long shots and close-ups of the stagecoach. After Wyler’s credit as director, the stagecoach rolls away from
the camera, up the vertical axis, and toward a distant town on the
horizon.
The superwide screen gave Bass a proper canvas to capture those endless golden plains in his 2:39-minute title sequence. Cinematographer
Franz Planer desaturated the image further to give the landscape a driedout look. Indeed, the subsequent narrative involves an irrational feud over
water in this moisture-deprived landscape. Just as the poster is monochromatic in orange, yellow, white, and black, Bass limits his color palette in
the titles to a golden yellow, the brown-black of the horses, a pale blue
sky, and the white typography, again emphasizing the dryness of the landscape through a poverty of color. Meanwhile, on the sound track, Jerome
Moross’s score pounds out grandiose western themes to accompany the
journey. Everything is done on an epic scale in Wyler’s western, so Bass
chooses a thick font to give the white typography weight against the
mostly golden background.
The wide-screen vistas again emphasize the vastness of the landscape.
The horizon moves up and down but is always above and exactly parallel
to the horizontal axis, thus taking advantage of the Technirama screen.
Surprisingly, Bass had this to say about wide-screen cinematography:
“The wide screen works extremely well with panoramic vistas such as in
The Big Country. . . . On the whole it works against our interests except
for horizontal figures and that provides us with certain advantages.”21 The
last image shows the stagecoach driving up the vertical axis of the frame,
the town nestled at the top of the screen, on the horizon, creating a visual
T that marks the journey’s end point.
Bass cuts from the long shots of the stagecoach to close-ups of the
horses’ heads, the wheels, and the hooves, keeping these images compositionally steady (the camera tracking to keep the objects centered), yet
their intense movement gives the impression of speed. Bass contrasts the
slow movement of the stagecoach in the extreme long shots with the
kinetic speed of the close shots, utilizing long dissolves to emphasize the
contrast even further. The designer is thus playing with onscreen space
through the variable movement of the stagecoach in the long and close
shots, contrasting speed and stasis. Interestingly, Bass excludes images of

273

SAUL BASS
any human beings, except for the tiny stagecoach drivers seen briefly in
the first shot, thus emphasizing the isolation and emptiness of the town
that is the stagecoach’s destination. It is an alien environment that must
be penetrated but offers little relief to the traveler. It is also possible that
Bass and Wyler wanted to avoid showing any of the riders in the stagecoach to heighten the mystery of who would be making such a long and
tedious journey. Only when the stagecoach stops in the town is it revealed
that it is the easterner, Gregory Peck, who has come to shake things up in
this intractable family feud. Having passed his first test by just getting
there, he will be further tested over the course of the narrative.
If The Big Country is all about open spaces, then Otto Preminger’s
The Cardinal (1963) is metaphorically about closed-off spaces, about a
lack of horizons and the limited choices available to a representative of the
Catholic Church. Like Preminger’s previous films about institutions (e.g.,
Anatomy of a Murder, Advise and Consent), The Cardinal delivers an
exemplary analysis of the church by following the career of a lowly priest
who is eventually elected to the College of Cardinals in Rome. Bass’s
credit sequence marks the priest’s journey on foot through the streets of
the Vatican to the meeting where he will be told of his ascension to cardinal. According to Bass, the walk gives the character the opportunity to
reminisce about his past life, shown in flashback in the narrative proper,
but ironically, the title sequence gives no indication what he is really thinking about.
The rights to Henry Morton Robinson’s 1950 novel had been languishing at Columbia since 1955, after Louis de Rochemont’s intention
to turn it into a film failed.22 Columbia dropped the project because of
fierce opposition from Cardinal Spellman of New York, who was convinced the central character was modeled on him.23 This left the field open
for Preminger, who announced in August 1961, while Advise and Consent was still in production, that The Cardinal would be his next project.
Beginning in the summer of 1962, he worked with Robert Dozier to produce a script from the sprawling novel, but blacklisted writer Ring Lardner Jr. and Gore Vidal both did rewrites without credit. Preminger was
probably responsible for a key scene that is not in the novel; it takes place
in 1938, at the time of the Anschluss in Vienna, and illustrates the Catholic Church’s cowardly attitude toward the Nazis.24 Production commenced in February 1963, with much of the film shot on location in
Boston, Rome (the Vatican), and Vienna, as well as at Revue Studios in

274

Journeys of Discovery
North Hollywood, and it wrapped on 10 May 1963.25 The Vatican liaison
for the film was a young Joseph Ratzinger, who would become Pope
Benedict XVI. After private screenings at the Vatican, which may have
financed a portion of the film, The Cardinal had its world premiere in
Paris in November and opened in Boston on 12 December as a benefit for
Cardinal Cushing. Initially road-showed at premium prices, The Cardinal
had box-office receipts in excess of $7 million by May 1964 and would
eventually gross over $11 million.26
The reviews were decidedly mixed. Bosley Crowther spent more than
half his review musing about the film it might have been if Preminger had
focused on the old cardinal played by John Huston, concluding that the
hero was totally colorless, even if the film had lots of pageantry.27 Irene
Thirer wrote in the New York Post: “The story of a man, rather than a
priest, played with true humility by Tom Tryon, is pictorially exquisite,
intelligently cast, and painstakingly, if not thrillingly directed.”28 Hollis
Alpert remarked that the cardinal “seems more Protestant than Catholic.
. . . They seem to have forgotten to include in him signs of genuine zeal,
fervor, and a sense of mission.” Ironically, in one of the few reviews that
mentions the titles, Preminger gets credit for their style: “He had Saul
Bass create a main title which is exclusively Preminger and it has become
his trademark.”29
As with other Preminger projects, Bass was responsible for elements
of the publicity campaign and the premiere invitation, as well as the credit
sequence. For the logo, Bass chose to use the title itself, with “The” casting a giant shadow behind the word “Cardinal” at the bottom of the
image. Bass places this logo on his trademark red-orange background,
covering the top three-fourths of the one-sheet poster; below, the word
“Cardinal” in white transitions to a white field that captures the remaining credits in black typography and acts as a pedestal for the logo.30 Inside
“The,” Bass creates a montage of photographic images of actor Tom
Tryon and his almost love interest, played by Romy Schneider; a couple
dancing the tango; and a Nazi parade. “The” has been interpreted as the
giant shadow of the church and its power, but why Bass eschewed an
iconographic logo in this case is unclear. One explanation may be that he
wanted to avoid the use of any overtly religious symbolism that could
have been identified with the Catholic Church but might have limited
audience appeal. Logos means “word” in Greek, and it is indeed the words
of the New Testament and the writings of the church fathers that are the

275

SAUL BASS
basis of Catholicism’s beliefs, rules, and regulations; therefore, using a
word-based image as a logo makes some sense, given that the film is about
the strictures of the Catholic Church. The images within the word, in
contrast, seem to conform to Hollywood publicity maxims, since the
focus on heterosexual relations (along with a little controversial political
commentary) makes little sense, given the film’s actual narrative. For the
window insert, Bass used the logo at the bottom of the frame, keeping the
article as a black shadow; he then added five photographic images in a
broken window design, as he had done in the trade advertising for Death
of a Salesman, again highlighting nonexistent heterosexual sex. However,
Bass’s design must have been considered successful, because it was used
for all the various poster sizes as well as for trade advertisements and other
collateral. Years later, Bass would reuse the idea of a logocentric design for
his poster of Stanley Kubrick’s The Shining (1980), inserting a ghostly
image within another “The” that dwarfs “Shining.”
Bass’s titles for The Cardinal are among his most beautiful. The visual
design adheres to a strict grid structure, in terms of both the live action
and the placement of typography. Interestingly, the live-action shots are
uncommonly long in the 3:10-minute sequence, averaging ten seconds,
yet the graphic titles themselves conform completely to the Bass brand.
To highlight the overall graphic design of the live-action shots, Bass composes his images to emphasize horizontal and vertical lines and patterns
that are inherent in either the Roman pavement or his framing. The movement of the actor through these spaces is either horizontal (parallel to the
lines of the titles and the composition) or vertical, but in such a way as to
obliterate any sense of depth. Likewise, the titles on the horizontal axis
either directly parallel the lines of the action or form crosses with the vertical lines of the composition, adding to the impression of flatness. A
number of other titles are placed on monochromatic fields without strong
vertical or horizontal lines. Bass plays with the flatness of the design by
reducing his color palette to a virtually monochromatic brown, beige,
white, and black.
The first long take, lasting twenty-one seconds, could have been shot
by Preminger. As the cardinal leaves his house, the camera tracks him as
he walks past and crosses the street. It is the only image in which the central character’s features are visible, in which he is identifiable as an individual. In all subsequent shots, the priest is seen from behind, from the
side, as a fleeting black-robed figure barely visible in an alley, as a shadow

276

Journeys of Discovery
on the pavement, as an upside-down reflection in a pool of water, or in an
extreme long shot as nothing but an exclamation point in a largely monochromatic pattern—in other words, as a stereotypical priest. Like the travelers in Edge of the City and The Big Country, the churchman remains a
cipher. For example, the sequence’s third shot, after the character is introduced, uses the shadows of stone columns to create black vertical and
horizontal bars that form squares through which the priest passes; he is
seen only walking away from the camera, seemingly moving without
movement because of the use of a telephoto lens to flatten space. In
another shot, Bass films Tryon in the background, tracking him with the
camera as lines of vertical columns pass in the foreground, accentuating
horizontal movement. Bass brilliantly exploits the wide screen by composing images of stairs that cover the screen with parallel lines; at other times
he shoots slightly downward, so that only the pavement and its patterns
are visible. Indeed, the figure of the priest is constantly framed by vertical
and horizontal patterns. Only a single short shot visualizes the priest walking up stairs that are placed diagonally in the composition, indicating that
he is “on the way up,” but even here, he remains a shadow. Why does Bass
use this level of abstraction to depict a journey to one of the Catholic
Church’s highest offices?
Bass’s titles demonstrate that The Cardinal is decidedly not the biography of an individual priest rising to the top of the church hierarchy;
rather, it is about the history of the Catholic Church as experienced by
one of its members. Like many of Preminger’s other films, The Cardinal
focuses on the functioning of an institution, not on the individual psychology of its characters. Furthermore, during the course of the narrative,
the cardinal is shown to be a weak character who consistently bows to the
edicts of the church, even when his sister’s life is at stake. In fact, his success as a churchman is based on his weakness, on his inability to break out
of the rutted path the church has planned for him, even when he momentarily falls in love with a woman. Surprisingly, Bass’s description of the title
sequence gives quite a different impression: “The film opens just prior to
his becoming a Cardinal, and then moves back in time to review his life.
The title shows him walking through Rome . . . through the Pagan and
Christian landmarks of the Eternal City . . . as he meditates on his past
life.”31
But in fact, the cardinal must conform to the patterns he traverses (on
either the horizontal or the vertical axis) if he wishes to achieve his goals

277

SAUL BASS
within the church. For this reason, the central character is depicted as
wandering through a rigid maze, a cipher who is virtually invisible in the
grid that represents church doctrine. (Interestingly, Bass reuses many of
these images in the title sequence for his unused finale for Phase IV and in
Quest, where the compositional grid also represents a new world order.)
Ironically, the sequence’s last split image—with the church on one side
and “il Duce” graffiti on the other—may be Bass’s trademark joke, this
time on Preminger, whose name fades out on the image. While ostensibly
signaling the film’s historical time frame, it could also be a comment on
Preminger’s well-publicized mistreatment of Tom Tryon, who left the
acting profession as a result of the experience.
Bass’s titles for A Walk on the Wild Side (1962), directed by Edward Dmytryk and based on a 1956 novel by Nelson Algren, may be his most celebrated, receiving more press than virtually any others. Apart from their
undeniable excellence, reviewers were struck by the contrast to the mediocre film that followed. Indeed, even Dmytryk acknowledged in his autobiography that Bass’s titles were “a masterpiece,” although he also claimed
the film had been well received.32 Since most of the film’s narrative takes
place in a New Orleans bordello, Bass visualizes a journey of a different
sort here: a promenade by an alley cat through its turf in the urban jungle.
Steven Spielberg later told Bass that he tried to re-create the title sequence
with his 8mm camera and his pet dog after seeing that black cat in A Walk
on the Wild Side.33
Charles K. Feldman bought the rights to the novel, looking for a
vehicle to make the European actress Capucine a star.34 He then hired several scriptwriters to turn the digressive and virtually plotless novel into a
workable script and to get the controversial material past the Motion Picture Production Code Office. According to published statements by actor
Laurence Harvey after the film opened, he blamed Feldman for bringing
in new writers who destroyed the script by watering it down.35 Shot on
location in New Orleans, as well as at Columbia studios in the summer of
1961, the film was supposed to premiere in New Orleans, but the event
was canceled when the city fathers apparently objected to the film; instead,
the film opened in New York on 21 February 1962.36
Before shooting the title sequence, Bass first did tests in 16mm using
his own cat. As he later commented: “You could talk to that cat and it
would do anything on demand.” However, Bass’s cat died before filming

278

Journeys of Discovery
actually commenced. The sequence eventually took three or four days to
shoot, including faking the cat fight by having people wear gloves and
hold the cats.37 Bass was apparently not involved in any of the publicity
designs, although the black cat is featured on the posters and on Elmer
Bernstein’s sound-track album. According to Bernstein, after meeting
with the producers about the score, he had no idea what to do, but Bass’s
storyboards of the cat fight inspired him.38 Bass’s own statements about
why he used the cat are contradictory. In one description he notes: “The
film is set in New Orleans in the early Thirties. And is about the disenfranchised, tough, seamy characters of a despairing time. Symbolic of this is
the cat in these titles credits.”39 Ten years later he exclaimed: “The cat was
the symbol of the basic variability and changeability of the women who
were the central characters. So the cat was right for the theme and mood
of the film.”40
The reviews for Walk on the Wild Side were mixed, due in no small
part to the fact that many critics, such as Hedda Hopper and Brendan
Gill, were uncomfortable with the subject of prostitution.41 They saw the
film as vulgar at best and as catering to European depravity at worst.
Other reviewers noted that the film failed to hold up to the titles Bass had
created.42 There were also some genuinely positive reviews that praised
both the film and Bass’s titles, including Hazel Flynn: “So we have here
what really amounts to an exposé comparing vice to a black panther
prowling the back alleys of a city, state or nation . . . in search of the innocent to prey upon with all the cunning and voracious appetite of the wild
and savage beast.”43 Finally, there was Judith Crist, the “critic most hated
by Hollywood,”44 who caustically demolished the film (but praised Bass):
“The complicated plot, which aspires to being at most ‘adult’ and at least
naughty, winds up as bathetic, foolish and dreary, a muddled mélange of
vacuous characters and naïve pseudo-psychology.”45
The titles begin with Elmer Bernstein’s award-winning tune and an
arresting image of stacked concrete pipes. The largest one in the center
reveals a black cat as the camera zooms into the darkness of the pipe,
where two cat’s eyes are visible just above the film’s title in white sans serif
capitals on the horizontal axis. The cat’s eyes stay onscreen in a slow dissolve as Bass cuts to an extreme high-angle shot of a black cat walking
down the vertical axis, while the stars’ names appear left-justified. Another
dissolve reveals the cat strolling horizontally, its black body filling the
frame, while Barbara Stanwyck’s credit appears left-justified on the hori-

279

SAUL BASS
zontal axis. Perfectly matching a cut on action, Bass dissolves to an even
closer shot from the same angle of the cat’s paws, as the supporting players are listed left-justified. Another dissolve has the cat walking straight
toward the camera, which must have been placed on the pavement, as the
major behind-the-scenes credits fade in and out. Bass next dissolves to a
shot of the cat walking horizontally to the right, then behind a wooden
fence, so that the animal is visible only in the cracks. It then moves in front
of the fence, as Bass zeroes in on a close-up of the cat’s head, framed by
credits for the production designer and associate producer above and
below. Walking behind a chain-link fence and between some pipes, the cat
continues to wander as more credits appear. Finally, seeing a white cat, the
black cat attacks, leading to a quick montage of a cat fight before the
“hero” emerges victorious. An extreme close-up of the cat’s head and eyes
marks the moment, before it resumes its stroll as the credits for the producer and director appear.
Formally, the 2:48-minute sequence, consisting of thirty-eight shots,
is constructed very similarly to the title sequence for The Cardinal, except
that here the protagonist is consistently moving to the right instead of to
the left. Like the later title, Walk on the Wild Side begins with a long
twenty-one-second shot, zooming in on the “hero” rather than tracking
him. All the remaining shots, however, are much shorter, as was Bass’s
usual style. One anomaly in the graphics is the use of a decorative feminine line design separating the principal actors’ credits. The lighting in the
black-and-white film is extremely high key, indicating that it is nighttime.
A strong sidelight illuminating the openings of the pipes, which form
stark circles, is reminiscent of the Alcoa Premiere sequence, which Bass
was producing almost simultaneously. Utilizing invisible nighttime light
sources, Bass divides his screen horizontally between the light pavement
and the dark background, so that the cat’s body is often invisible in the
darkness, except for the eyes in frontal shots. The cat’s walk was clearly
shot at significantly more than twenty-four frames per second, giving its
movements a languid, lazy, slow-motion feeling, especially in connection
with the slow dissolves. In contrast, the cat’s movement is accentuated
when it walks behind a wooden or chain-link fence or behind pipes in the
foreground, a device Bass also used in The Cardinal. Bass intercuts longer
and closer shots, again to vary the perception of movement even though
the action is continuous, as he did in The Big Country.
The cat fight consists of twenty-four separate shots in a blur of white

280

Journeys of Discovery
and black fur; each shot is only a fraction of a second long, so the battle is
over almost before it begins. The feline altercation is, of course, Bass’s
trademark surprise at the end of the title sequence. Here, it becomes all
the more graphic through the contrast between the black and white cats.
Given that the central conflict in the film is between a naïve country
bumpkin come to the big city and a hard-boiled madam of a whorehouse,
one might, as Bass did later, see the cat fight as a metaphor for the film’s
narrative. Bass, of course, is playing with a slang term for a house of prostitution—namely, a cathouse—and he ends the title sequence with a literal
cat fight—also a slang term for an altercation between two women fighting “in a vicious, cat-like manner, esp. by scratching, pulling hair, and biting.”46 While the black cat successfully defends its turf against the intruder
and continues its journey, the end of the cinematic narrative is both violent and deadly.
Interestingly, thanks to several close-ups of its face and eyes, the cat
has more personality than any of the human characters in Bass’s other title
sequences constructed around journeys. The cat’s body movements, particularly in close-ups focusing on the front paws, have a grace that not
only cat lovers find appealing, especially accompanied by Elmer Bernstein’s jazzy crossover hit. The first and longest image of the sequence
gives a lot of face time to the cat, making it abundantly clear that this is a
good-looking cat that has the right moves—a “character” the audience
can identify with. Whereas the black cat is well groomed for stardom, the
white cat is covered with street dirt; it is, after all, an urban alley cat. The
black cat appears not only in the title sequence but also in the end credits,
where it walks over an old newspaper announcing the fate of the jealous
madam. Constructed of outtakes, the end sequence shows the cat walking
in the opposite direction from the opening, its body filling the frame
through the end credits and a final “The End.” The cat’s “humanity”
makes the sequence work, as indicated by the critical response.
What Walk on the Wild Side demonstrates by its implementation of
the mechanisms of identification is how little identity is given to the characters in other Bass titles. They remain shadows, figures trapped in the
geometry of Bass’s landscape designs. The titles contain not a single closeup—the very thing actors fight for. Is this a case in which the formal challenge—that is, to prepare for the beginning of the narrative proper
without actually beginning it—forces Bass to deny any possibility of identification, thus bringing his project within the realm of avant-garde cin-

281

SAUL BASS
ema? Just as his titles continue to be constructed along a grid, his characters
are strictly limited to horizontal and/or vertical movements, parallel to
the frame’s axes. This rigid formalism functions only to call attention to
the artificiality of the image itself, again countering the aesthetic thrust of
Hollywood narrative cinema, which makes artifice invisible. We can therefore theorize that in Bass’s titles about journeys, it is not the characters
themselves or their symbolic stand-ins who acquire knowledge through
travel; it is the audience. In contrast, Saul Bass’s films either create characters for identification or construct subjective views for the audience that
visualize the acquisition of knowledge through travel, through the quest.

From Here to There
Sponsored by United Airlines, Saul and Elaine Bass’s first film together,
From Here to There (1964), was produced for the Transportation and
Travel Pavilion at the New York World’s Fair and was shown at United
Airlines’ Jetarama Theater from 22 April 1964 through 17 October
1965.47 Though slightly less than nine minutes long, the film had a huge
impact in terms of both its reception by hundreds of thousands of viewers
at the World’s Fair and its awards at international festivals. Technically
innovative in its use of both 35mm Academy aperture (in monochrome
sepia) and 35mm Cinemascope (in color), the film is conceptually simple—an airplane journey from Los Angeles to New York, or. from here to
there. Yet it is brilliantly executed, turning vision from the air into a kaleidoscope of abstract art images. Indeed, the film embodies the notion that
travel broadens human perception by allowing travelers to see the United
States as they have never seen it before. Bass himself described the film as
follows: “The film deals, in kaleidoscopic form, with the air travel experience—the excitement, the love, the poignancy—of partings and greetings, and the unique visual experience of aerial flight.”48
Although no documentation survives revealing how Bass won the
commission to make the film, the idea to shoot straight down from the air
onto the landscape probably came from his experience working on the
opening of West Side Story. Indeed, some of the later images in From Here
to There, such as when the plane is circling New York to land, could have
been outtakes from the earlier film. From Here to There was independently
produced by Saul Bass & Associates, directed by Saul Bass, and “conceived and designed” by Elaine and Saul Bass. Albert Nalpas edited the

282

Journeys of Discovery
film with Saul, and Jeff Alexander composed the music. The aerial photography was shot by William Garnett from a Cessna aircraft; one camera
was mounted to point through a side window, and another camera shot
footage through a port cut in the bottom of the plane.
After the New York World’s Fair closed, the film was shown at numerous festivals and was distributed through Pyramid Films, although the
16mm nontheatrical Pyramid prints did not open up to a wide-screen
view, as the 35mm version did.49 The film won the Gold Medal Award
from the Art Directors Club of Los Angeles, the Golden Eagle Award
from CINE (Council on International Non-Theatrical Events), and prizes
from the Chicago International Film Festival, the International Film Festival of New York, the Rio de Janeiro International Film Festival, the Cracow International Festival of Short Films, and the Melbourne Film
Festival.
The reviews were extremely complimentary to Saul Bass. Shortly after
the fair opened, the critic for Cue Magazine wrote: “Evidently Mr. Bass,
so well-represented at Eastman Kodak, cannot complete an assignment
without artistry. The little introduction and epilogue are as humorous and
poignant as the meetings and partings of all humanity.”50 The Hollywood
Reporter positively gushed: “One thing Bass demonstrates brilliantly is
that the art form serves its creator or interpreter to the degree that the artist knows his art. Bass is a master and an innovator in film because he
knows film’s limitations and elasticity.” Meanwhile, a review in the Los
Angeles Herald Examiner reminds us that air travel was still a rare experience for many Americans in 1964: “For more than 150 million Americans, jet travel has only been a dream. And for those who have never
flown, a unique visual experience awaits them at the United Airlines
exhibit at the New York World’s Fair.”51
From Here to There opens at Los Angeles International Airport as passengers arrive with their bags, wait in the terminal for their flights, and bid
farewell to their friends, relatives, and lovers. Bass then cuts to a close-up
of a jet engine, followed by shots of a United Airlines jet moving down
the runway and taking off. Two minutes into the film, the aperture opens
up to a wide-screen vista as Bass transitions to a subjective view from the
plane itself. He then alternates between highly abstracted views of the
American landscape taken from 35,000 feet in the air, looking straight
down, and images of the same or similar scenes taken from the ground.
For example, Bass cuts from an image of the meandering Mississippi River

283

SAUL BASS
to a shot of a steam-powered riverboat, or from a composition of big trees
to aerial shots of logs floating in formation downriver to a logger on the
river, then back to the aerial view. Whereas the images taken from the
plane steadily but slowly track right, as if traveling from west to east, the
images on the ground often involve movement within the wide-screen
frame. Finally, as the plane approaches the runway at Idlewild Airport,
shown in a subjective view from the air, the screen narrows again to Academy aperture. People are waiting at the gate as the passengers begin to
arrive, carrying the same packages and suitcases seen earlier. Next, Bass
creates a montage of reunions, including a close-up of Bass himself holding a giant stuffed panda and greeting a small child who runs into his
arms. Finally, the scene focuses on a little girl watching a set of small
mechanical birds hopping toward the exit. “Presented by United Airlines” is written on one bird, while another features “Produced by Saul
Bass & Associates” around its button eye—Bass’s trademark closing joke.
Although financed by United Airlines, From Here to There is more of
an advertisement for air travel in general than for the carrier itself. Apart
from the final credit, the United Airlines name and logo are seen only in
extreme long shots of planes on the tarmac. The one exception is a rectangular matte shot after the plane lands that blocks out everything except
its tail (featuring the old UA logo, ten years before Bass designed a new
one). And given that the film is underscored with music but contains no
voice-overs or dialogue or any words at all, there are no opportunities for
promotion at that level. The nontheatrical Pyramid prints even eliminated
the last mechanical bird shot with the United Airlines logo, another
attempt by Bass to obfuscate the film’s sponsored origins. On the narrative level, the film obviously reproduces Bass’s own journey from Los
Angeles to New York to attend the World’s Fair. Yet Bass’s film is in fact
structured around vision as a form of knowledge; it makes the secondary
point, by means of the airport scenes at the beginning and end of the film,
that air travel brings people together quickly and efficiently. For each
aspect, Bass develops a different aesthetic strategy.
For the opening and closing sequences in the airports’ departure and
arrival lounges, Bass uses a monochromatic, sepia-toned film stock in
Academy aperture because he wants to emphasize the human emotions
inherent in separations from and reunifications with family and friends. As
noted earlier, Bass was not a big fan of wide-screen processes; like many
classical Hollywood filmmakers, he considered wide screen too big for

284

Journeys of Discovery
close-up views and therefore ineffective in capturing intimate moments
that foster viewer identification. Indeed, both airport sequences are perfectly matched montages of specific visual details, with Bass relying on
extreme close-ups that eliminate the surrounding context. In the opening
at the Los Angeles airport, Bass edits together a series of bags and suitcases, cut on movement, as the passengers carrying them are tracked by
the camera. He follows that up with a montage of close-ups of passengers
and those being left behind, hugging, kissing, shaking hands, waving. In
between, Bass adds a visual joke: he includes a shot of a little girl releasing
a helium balloon, then shows groups of people staring up at the balloon
out of the frame. In the New York airport, Bass again cuts together
extreme close-up shots of people looking around and awaiting the arrival
of passengers. Again he uses matched cuts as people find each other and
hug and kiss, including an image of Bass himself kneeling on the floor to
hug an arriving child. Elaine Bass is seen in another close-up, waving to an
imaginary passenger. Bass inserts another joke: a girl opens a jack-in-thebox and gets whacked by her mother. Then come the mechanical birds as
a final coda for the film’s only credits, which serve to remind the audience
that, unlike these hopping birds, they have just experienced real flight.
The use of close-ups and matched cuts that emphasize effortless and
smooth transitions (figuratively and literally) succeeds in creating moments
of identification and empathy in the audience, bringing back to a human
scale the celestial experience of flight.
The use of two different screen formats also brings into stark relief the
contrast between the abstract experience of jet airplane travel and the
human outcomes of travel itself. Interestingly, Bass transitions between
the two, at both the beginning and the end, by cutting together images
of the plane taking off and landing. These cinematographic images were
achieved with a supertelephoto 1000mm lens, allowing close-ups of the
plane’s wheels, engines, and wings as it took off; however, this also completely flattened space, so the jet appears to be moving without movement. Bass repeats this design element in the views from the air, where the
landscapes appear to be passing very slowly beneath the plane. The widescreen color images of flight not only visualize a unique perspective but
also communicate the rich variety of natural and man-made landscapes
and even moments of American history. As Bass learned from his experience creating the titles for The Big Country and West Side Story, the Cinemascope screen allows the camera to capture the sheer size of the

285

SAUL BASS
American continent, while also replicating the experience of looking
down on an abstracted landscape and wondering what is actually down
there. For his bird’s-eye-view images, Bass may have drawn inspiration
from aerial photographs reproduced by Kepes and Moholy-Nagy in their
respective books, both noting that such views from on high destroy the
Renaissance perspective and a stable horizon, allowing the establishment
of spatial relationships that compress space.52 Bass’s aerial views are almost
completely abstract, the various topographies of the landscape morphing
into visual patterns, such as the checkerboards of the grain fields in the
midwestern plains or the irregular shapes, lines, dots, and spots that make
up the image of the Hoover Dam. While the former recalls Paul Klee, the
latter could be mistaken for an Abstract Expressionist painting.
The urban landscapes, too, are like abstract canvases. One shot features a highway cutting the screen in half at the horizontal axis while an
image of the Brooklyn Bridge is superimposed, adding a strong vertical
design element. In another, an image of a highway interchange looks like
a giant bow, then dissolves to an abstract pattern of parked cars. These
aerial views alternate with shots from the ground that make concrete
what was previously abstract—for instance, the Hoover Dam image is
intercut with shots of water flowing through giant turbines. Here, Bass
is presenting a lecture in vision and imagination, in seeing from afar and
from up close, in learning to read abstracted images and imagining what
they mean. At one point, Bass even superimposes vertically and horizontally composed images of fields over what appears to be a historical image
of the Cimarron land rush, a nod to the way the continent was populated. We can thus interpret the wide-screen middle section, particularly
the abstracted images of topography, as an invitation to discuss the semiotics of photographic images. Just as the air traveler looks down and
attempts to read the landscape to discover what is below, Bass affords the
audience the opportunity to read abstracted images and decode their
meaning. Cutting to images on the ground that decode the actual semantic meaning of the previously seen images reinforces the visual play
between close and far; it allows viewers to “check their work,” so to
speak, and communicates the notion that seeing through travel is a form
of knowledge. Finally, the utilization of two screen formats in one film
makes the constructed nature of the cinematic experience apparent to
even the most naïve viewer, foregrounding vision the way the best avantgarde films do.

286

Journeys of Discovery

The Searching Eye
While From Here to There was premiering at the United Airlines Pavilion
at the 1964 New York World’s Fair, The Searching Eye was opening at the
Eastman Kodak Pavilion. The two films can be seen as companion pieces,
and not only because of the geographic and temporal proximity of their
release. Both films oscillate between Academy and wide-screen formats, as
tropes of different kinds of vision, and are essentially meditations on vision
and travel. Both films were financed by corporate clients, but they do not
advertise specific products. Rather, they encourage the desire to engage in
specific behaviors that can be facilitated by the products and services
offered by the sponsoring companies. However, while From Here to There
presents a discourse on sight in the subtext, The Searching Eye, as the title
indicates, is expressis verbis about vision, employing a whole catalog of cinematic techniques to illustrate various forms of cinematic perception. Bass
moves from the macrocosmic world of air travel in the former film to the
microcosmic vision of a young boy walking and playing on an ocean
beach. Whereas the former can create empathy only in the narrative frame,
The Searching Eye much more overtly instrumentalizes mechanisms of
identification to engage the audience, making it a hybrid that vacillates
between Hollywood narrative technique and the avant-garde.
The Searching Eye was part of a massive pavilion that included an
eighty-foot tower with screens projecting the world’s largest color photographs, visible from anywhere on the fairgrounds. The Kodak Pavilion
itself housed fifteen exhibit halls, including two theaters. According to the
1964 World’s Fair website, the pavilion was conceived with three goals in
mind: “to demonstrate the wealth of experience to be gained from photography, to provide scenes for on-the-spot picture-taking, and to show
the influence of photography on various aspects of modern life, among
them science, leisure, medicine, industry and education.”53 The film was
shown every half hour to as many as 35,000 people a day in a large circular
theater built into the base of the picture tower.54 Records indicate that the
Basses produced three different versions of the film. The version shown at
the World’s Fair utilized two 70mm projectors simultaneously.55 The
70mm film may or may not be identical to the twenty-three-minute
35mm version. A 16mm version, cut to seventeen minutes, included a
completely different narration and many alternative shots and was released
by Pyramid in 1969.56

287

SAUL BASS
When ground was broken for the Kodak Pavilion in August 1962, the
company was planning to make a twelve- to fourteen-minute motion picture, according to a press release, but the producers are not mentioned.57
Saul Bass’s involvement actually began much earlier: he had made a bid to
design the whole pavilion, as indicated by an undated photo of a model on
an index card in the Bass Papers, and he eventually sued the commission
responsible for the World’s Fair when he failed to win the bid.58 Interestingly, the design submitted by Herb Rosenthal and Saul Bass could be
mistaken for the ground level of the design chosen by Kodak’s architects.
Elaine and Saul began work on The Searching Eye sometime before
September 1963, having hired Walter Lane, the ten-year-old son of actor
Rusty Lane, to appear in the film.59 Bass was ideal for the job. There were
more experienced filmmakers around, but Kodak wanted its World’s Fair
exhibit to be cutting edge. Bass gave the company street credibility
because he was much more than a filmmaker; he was a designer, and he
was avant-garde without being threatening. Maybe most important, Bass
was not just a producer of images but also an intense consumer of them.
As a graphic designer and a filmmaker, Bass virtually imbibed images. Previous references to images from Moholy-Nagy’s and Kepes’s books clearly
indicate that everything Bass viewed was used as grist for his mill. The
Searching Eye was Bass’s first independent film—that is, one that allowed
him to utilize his own growing archive of virtual and real stock shots and
craft a montage of heterogeneous material. Numerous images can convey
the consumer’s desire for photographs, so Bass’s concept of a film about
vision—in other words, the conscious perception of photographic and
cinematic images—perfectly matched Kodak’s goals.
An undated publicity text about The Searching Eye, printed on Saul
Bass & Associates stationery, picks up an idea that was central to 1920s
German avant-garde filmmaking—namely, that the camera is an extension
of human vision. Bauhaus artists and film theoreticians made it the structuring principle of the seminal Film und Foto exhibition that opened in
Stuttgart in May 1929 and was curated by Moholy-Nagy and Hans Richter.60 A central metaphor of that exhibit was the “camera eye” as a new
form of perception attuned to the modern age. Thus, Dziga Vertov’s
Man with the Movie Camera (1929), shown at the exhibition, was a symphony of images demonstrating that the photographic camera expands
the physiological and emotional parameters of human optics. Vertov had
previously completed forty-five Kino-Eye newsreels that purported to

288

Journeys of Discovery
show the real lives of workers and farmers in the new Soviet state, even as
he espoused the notion in various theoretical texts that the camera eye is
a more perfect form of human vision that can investigate the chaos of
visual appearances. Franz Roh and German designer Jan Tschichold, who
almost single-handedly invented modern-style typeface and was strongly
influenced by the Bauhaus, even though he trained in Dresden, published
Foto Auge, Photo-Eye, Oeil et Photo in 1929, which likewise uses metaphor
to visually explicate the “New Vision” in photography. Very much in the
spirit of these texts, Bass wrote: “Man has devised many different instruments to extend the limits of our ‘highest privilege.’ . . . The telescope to
penetrate the infinite limits of space . . . the microscope to penetrate the
finite limits of matter . . . and the camera, to record what ‘the searching
eye,’ aided or unaided, has found. All learning, all thinking, the doing of
man starts first with . . . sight!”61
Sight is a continuous human experience, but one that few actively and
consciously pursue. Bass wanted everyone to really see the world, whether
on a walk along the beach or a journey across the continent in a plane or
automobile. In an interview with David Sohn, Bass made this point explicitly: “Everything in the film was approached from that point of view—to
take the ordinary, unexotic expressions of these things and find a way of
looking at them that would reveal the known as the unknown.”62 Just as
in his title sequences, Bass wanted to point out the extraordinary in everyday objects, and here, he wanted to expand the concept to all forms of
photographic vision.
The film’s reception by the press was not only extremely positive but
also quantitatively staggering, given that it was a short film at an event
that encompassed hundreds of attractions. The New York Times alone
mentioned The Searching Eye in no fewer than four articles between April
and September 1964.63 It also published a sixteen-page supplement about
the Kodak Pavilion that included two pages of illustrations from the film.64
The most positive review in the Times came from Jacob Deschin, published days before the fair opened: “For sheer visual excitement, boldly
inventive imagination, and technical virtuosity, it has rarely been equaled.
Its poetic message, the exaltation of the familiar and the commonplace,
will be appreciated by audiences on all levels.”65 James Powers in the Hollywood Reporter also focused on Bass’s self-assured manipulation of the
medium: “Bass brilliantly demonstrates that the art form serves its creator
or interpreter to the degree that the artist knows his art.”66 Finally, a

289

SAUL BASS
reviewer in Modern Photography noted that Bass scrupulously circumvented a naïve interpretation, even though his subject is a young boy:
“Bass avoids the usual cliché of a boy discovering the world. While he
shows the boy looking and seeing, he also shows that there’s much that
the untutored eye can’t see.”67 The film garnered more film festival prizes
than From Here to There. The Searching Eye won the Lion of St. Mark at
the Venice Film Festival, as well as the Golden Gondola Award from the
International Committee for the Diffusion of Artistic and Literary Works
by the Cinema (CIDALC). The film also captured prizes from the Chicago, San Francisco, New York, and Edinburgh Film Festivals in 1964
and received a CINE Golden Eagle Award. Eastman Kodak was extremely
happy with the film’s reception; it played to consistently packed houses, as
indicated in a press release after the fair closed.68
The Searching Eye opens with the film’s logo—an abstracted eye
design consisting of white rectangles and a rainbow pie as a pupil—above
the title.69 The eye turns into an orange globe that grows and shrinks
onscreen, then goes black. A montage of close-ups of various animal and
human eyeballs follows. Only then does Bass introduce his star, an approximately ten-year-old blond boy. The boy walks through marshy fields to
the beach, where he jumps into the surf. At that point, the screen expands
from Academy ratio to a wide-screen format, and the camera plunges into
the ocean to reveal the underwater world. The film returns to the smaller
format when the boy continues to explore the beach and various rocks
along the shore, then it goes wide again when he watches a flock of
seagulls flying by; a sequence on animal and human flight follows. Next,
the boy builds a sand castle, and the camera zooms in to reveal a microscopic shot of a grain of sand; Bass then inserts a wide-screen montage of
the geologic origins of the earth. Bass reserves the Academy-sized images
to depict the boy and his journey, while the wide-screen images illustrate
what the boy sees—or what he doesn’t see but Bass wants the audience to
see. The boy continues his journey to a pier, as Bass inserts wide-screen
sequences of water drops falling in extreme slow motion and flowers
blooming in fast motion. Finally, the boy returns home and looks out the
window, using a piece of paper to create a “telescope.” Bass then cuts to
wide-screen images of the sun before returning to the boy, who closes the
window and ends the film. The short version eliminates several of the
wide-screen explorations and ends on a completely different shot.
The most important formal feature of The Searching Eye, like From

290

Journeys of Discovery
Here to There, is the intermixing of two formats: 35mm Academy aperture
and 70mm wide screen. The latter also allows for impressive split-screen
images. Bass employs the 1:1.33 Academy ratio to bring the boy’s quest,
or just his serendipitous exploration of a seashore environment, closer to
the viewer. Here, Bass chooses classical Hollywood composition and continuity editing to create a bond between the boy and the audience, most
of whom remember similar moments in their own lives. He walks along
the beach, he builds a sand castle, he gets his photograph taken on the
pier—these are iconic “Kodak moments” in the life of almost every boy
and girl in America. The adventure with the photographer gets its own
tagline: “So we try to preserve the image as a tangible memory.” In
another endearing sequence, we see the boy imitating a seagull on the
beach as he tries to sneak up on them. Visual interest in the boy is not
diminished by the fact that he is extremely photogenic; in fact, a Hollywood producer was willing to offer him a long-term contract after the
film opened.70 Bass credited Elaine with getting a naturalistic performance
from the boy, who was, after all, an untrained actor. Bass also used very
long lenses, shooting the boy from very far away so he wouldn’t be so
conscious of the camera, but also optically isolating him within the frame
because of the extremely short depth of field (focus).71 The light, too,
adds to the sense of nostalgia for one’s own childhood, especially in the
scene where the boy is shown in close-up, eating an apple, as the bright
late-afternoon light puts a yellow glow on the scene. Finally, by cutting
away continually to the boy looking at the camera and then at what he
sees, or vice versa, Bass places the subject in the position of the onscreen
boy. For example, Bass inserts an extreme close-up of a dragonfly’s head
as it cleans itself, then cuts away to the boy looking at it before the dragonfly flies away. However, many other sequences transition to the widescreen view, which, through subsequent editing, clearly tells the audience
that this is not necessarily what the boy sees.
Indeed, at the same time and in apparent contradistinction to Bass’s
aesthetic of classical Hollywood crosscutting, he employs the wide-screen
sequences to communicate directly with the audience—a strategy that
cannot but help make the audience conscious of the techniques employed.
Indeed, the wide-screen images are visual lectures articulating the film’s
thesis that the camera is an important technological extension of the
human eye. The fact that the screen is repeatedly opening and closing its
field of vision adds a level of self-reflexivity to the film, taking it into the

291

SAUL BASS
realm of the avant-garde. In fact, the film’s opening shots can be construed as a Constructivist exercise in screen size and perception: an orange
globe grows and shrinks, followed by a cut to utter blackness, demonstrating that relative size on a flat surface can be translated into the perception of distance. The optical illusion of the undulating circle on a black
background creates a visual metaphor for the theoretical possibilities of
screen composition, just as the subsequent blackness establishes the
parameters of the format and creates a yin to the yang of actual moving
images on the screen.
Bass also cuts away periodically to sets of human and animal eyes,
some of them from works of art, again pointing to the act of vision and its
depiction in art. In another wide-screen sequence, Bass again articulates
the notion of the camera as an expansion of human vision, visually analyzing the movement of a drop of water through extreme slow motion,
through stroboscopic freeze-frames of a drop’s splash, through vertical
split screens presenting the movement of raindrops, as the narrator
intones, “We learn how to slow down truth, so we can see and understand.” The freeze-frame of a drop hitting the water’s surface is a staple
for illustrating the expansion of the eye’s physiological properties, going
back as far as Hans Richter’s Film Enemies of Today—Film Friends of
Tomorrow (1929). In other words, Bass never strays far from his central
topic—namely, the nature of vision, which he defines as the perception of
the real world through camera-produced images.
Mediating between the two screen formats and the two points of
view—the limited, first-person view of the boy and the wide-screen, omniscient point of view—is the offscreen narrator. His soothing voice both
ingratiates the boy to the audience (reproducing some of his thoughts)
and expertly communicates scientific facts and theses. The narrator moves
effortlessly from third-person omniscient to first-person plural, the not so
royal we inviting the audience to identify with him: “Searching always for
a more perfect perception of reality, impatient with the limits of our vision,
we learn how to slow down truth, so we can see and understand.” Knowledge is thus communicated not through identification with the boy, as in
the visual design and the Hollywood classical narrative, but through the
narrator’s decorporalized voice of science and reason; in other words, it is
a body of knowledge from the world of adults.
Each of the wide-screen sequences maps out a different science project. The in-the-surf scene expands to wide screen when the boy jumps in

292

Journeys of Discovery
the water; the shots of the surf are already accentuating the wideness of
the view through horizontal compositions. Plunging underwater, the
camera reveals the hidden and mysterious world of sharks, sardines, and
other colorful fish. The underwater view then transitions to shots of
microscopic organisms floating in water. The microscopic close-ups are
accompanied by the intonation: “To enlarge his vision, to reveal what he
can’t see with the unaided eye, so that he might know and understand.”
Within the diegetic frame, the “he” refers to the boy, but the images are
visible only to the audience. The wide screen also allows Bass to construct
multi-image panels across the screen space, going from four images of the
same floating, spinning organisms to what seem to be hundreds. Having
delved into the mysteries of water, the film’s next wide-screen foray is into
the air, as Bass demonstrates the natural flight of birds and attempts to
visualize the mechanics of flight. The next wide-screen sequence takes the
viewer into the earth, where images of lava flows are multiplied again in
multiple split screens before Bass constructs a planetary creation myth,
with stormy seas and ultimately dried-out riverbeds in a desert landscape.
Bass would later remake this particular sequence for The Solar Film. The
subsequent aerial shots of a typography designed by humans who have
plowed fields, built roads, and constructed cities directly references From
Here to There and may even include a shot from that film, given that both
films were produced simultaneously. From the natural signs of the universe—water, air, and earth—Bass moves on to the growth of plant and
animal life, the former visualized by fast motion: multiscreen imagery of
seedlings pushing up from the soil and growing, riots of flowers blooming, strawberries and tomatoes ripening, barren trees acquiring and then
shedding leaves, the lines of a cut tree revealing its age. From water, air,
and earth signs to the circle of life on our planet, the audience’s exploration of natural phenomena concludes almost inevitably with wide-screen
images of the sun (and the fire sign), the nuclear explosions on its surface
and the reddish-orange deity setting into the ocean’s endless horizon.
Shot on a California beach, The Searching Eye embraces both scientific
methodology and ancient mysticism, childlike innocence and self-assured
experience, a nostalgic Hollywood narrative of our collective childhood
memories and a self-reflexive, avant-gardist meditation on the practical
and theoretical implications of camera vision.
In particular, the sand-castle scene—where first the surf and then the
boy destroy his creation—offers Bass the opportunity to visualize the

293

SAUL BASS
boy’s fantasy of medieval knights and engage the audience in an intense
reverie of their own. Bass inserts a brief faux animation sequence of knights
in armor fighting for the sand castle (achieved through ultraquick cuts), as
the boy looks on from one of its windows. Bass would use this montage of
two different levels of narrative within the same compositional frame again
in Windows (1977), a promotional film for Warner Brothers that he recut
to create the less overtly commercial Notes on the Popular Arts. The whole
sand-castle sequence, with its wide-screen intercuts, crystallizes through
image and word Bass’s important statement about the connection between
imagination and creativity, a topic he returns to repeatedly in film and
print media. As the boy’s sand castle disappears into the surf, the narrator
consoles: “Man struggles to preserve his vision and his dreams.” He continues: “Man recognizes the strength of reality. He accepts it and becomes
a part of it.” In other words, creativity is possible only through failure. It
is an idea Bass develops further in Why Man Creates.
Ultimately, then, The Searching Eye offers two journeys of discovery.
One is made by the boy, whose sense of playful exploration reflects the
audience’s own childhood experience. The other journey is made by the
audience; guided by the narrator, the viewers explore the planet’s natural
phenomena through wide-screen and other cinematic techniques, including slow-motion, time-lapse, stroboscopic, microscopic, and telescopic
photography. The film’s self-reflexive discourse on vision and the mechanical tools and techniques available to the photographer and filmmaker
adds a critical dimension, in keeping with the project’s overall goal of creating a film appropriate for Kodak Pavilion audiences. The question, however, is why Elaine and Saul Bass chose the narrative frame of a child’s
walk on a California beach, given the fact that they had been working for
several years on an unidentified New York film that seemingly was more
in keeping with the modernism communicated by the Kodak Pavilion’s
architecture. The answer may be that, after two decades in California, Bass
was succumbing to the nature-oriented, sun-burnt, quasi-mystical, West
Coast mumbo-jumbo culture of fruits, nuts, and flakes. Certainly, Quest
(1983), made almost two decades later, supports this explanation.

Quest
Six years after directing Phase IV (1974), Bass returned to fiction filmmaking (and to science fiction) for the second and last time. Working with

294

Journeys of Discovery
Elaine, Saul directed a thirty-minute film that not only utilizes the narrative structure of a journey to communicate intellectual content and experience but actually portrays a fictional journey (a quest) that can be
understood as an allegory. Financed by a Japanese religious cult and therefore overtly conveying mystical forms of spiritual thought, Quest is based
on a story by Ray Bradbury; it is about the journey of a male member of
the religious community to find “the light,” firmly placing the narrative in
the realm of metaphor rather than realistic depiction. Indeed, the film’s
star is not its central character but rather its art direction, resulting in a
phantasmagoric landscape utilizing miniatures, mattes, lighting, superimpositions, and other technical effects. Although the film was screened at
film festivals in the United States and was eventually distributed nontheatrically by Pyramid Films, its reach was limited by its producers, except in
Japan, where the film was shown eight times a day over a four-year period
at the headquarters of M. Okada International Association in Atami.72
Herb Yager was the initial contact for the Quest production. While in
Japan, he was invited to Atami (outside Tokyo), one of the three sites chosen by Mokichi Okada for his churches because of the “harmonious unity
of natural beauty and aesthetic man-made features.” The cult had built a
shrine on a mountaintop, requiring pilgrims to take two incredibly long
escalators to reach it. When Yager saw the amphitheater-like space, he
suggested that Saul Bass could make a film to be shown to the church’s
congregation. Bass initially felt uncomfortable with the religious subject,
but he eventually agreed with Yager that it could be a purely metaphoric
vision without proselytizing for the church, just as his other sponsored
films had avoided product placement.73 Church officials may have been
impressed by the 1979 special issue of the Japanese design magazine
IDEA, which was dedicated solely to Saul Bass & Associates, and they
agreed to let Bass make “a positive film, a film that doesn’t view life as a
prelude to disaster.”74
The Church of World Messianity (reorganized in 1980 as the M.
Okada International Association) had been founded in January 1935 by
Japanese amateur philosopher Mokichi Okada (1882–1955). Okada
claimed that in 1926 he had received a divine revelation from God that
empowered him to channel God’s healing light, called Johrei. Okada
hoped to “develop a civilization that allows us to regain those pure and
refined sensitivities that help us to live rich and fulfilling lives, rediscover
the meaning of life, recognize how blissful it is to be alive, and find new

295

SAUL BASS
ways of living based on the true meaning of humanity.”75 If the cult’s
name change can be seen as part of a new identity campaign, rebranding
its spiritual ideology in a more secular framework, then Bass was the right
man to make the film. Although the church’s theological interpretation of
Johrei and Bass’s cinematic understanding of light may have been only
tenuously connected, it was the promise of artistic freedom that attracted
the designer: “Once agreement had been reached on the script and budget, Saul and Elaine . . . would be left entirely to themselves during the
production.”76 Clearly, Bass hoped that the Japanese church fathers would
function the way United, Kodak, and Kaiser had, supplying money but
not insisting on advertising their religious beliefs.
In any case, Bass sent a film proposal to Okada International in late
November 1980. Two weeks later, he began discussions with Ray Bradbury about writing a science fiction script for the project, apparently
already aware that the Japanese were willing to fund a production budget
of $1 million for the short film. In March 1981 the budget was approved
at $1.1 million, with $250,000 going to Bass/Yager and $748,000 for
the actual production.77 However, Bass was worried because, “in recent
years there have been a bunch of very big budget features that have established a level of expectation in the special effects area.”78 He therefore
suggested that Bradbury set the story on earth rather than in outer space.
Bradbury ended up adapting an old short story of his called “Frost and
Fire” (first published in 1946 in Planet Stories under the title “The Creatures that Time Forgot”). As he had done on all his previous film projects,
Bass designed extremely detailed storyboards for every shot in the film, in
some cases creating multiple storyboards for longer, more complicated
shots. According to Elaine Bass: “We evolved a landscape, a physical landscape of the world and the journey. We built into the landscape many of
the visual ideas that had fascinated us over the years.”79 Given the need to
hold costs down, the film was shot on a 50- by 150-foot rented sound
stage in Hollywood, with much of the set décor and landscape provided
by rear projection, superimpositions, animation, and models.80 Costs were
further curtailed by eschewing almost all synchronous sound; only the
early scenes were narrated, and much of the film had no dialogue at all.
The music by Berington Van Campen, with additional music from Gustav
Holst’s orchestral suite The Planets (1916), was recorded in February
1983. Despite the best intentions, the film went over budget by more
than half, forcing the firm to eat the cost overruns.

296

Journeys of Discovery
The film premiered in Japan on 15 June 1983, at a festival sponsored
by Okada International. Over the next four years, the film played eight
times a day at the church’s headquarters. Bass had to constantly make new
35mm prints because the old ones wore out. When Okada switched from
carbon to zenon lamps in its projectors, changing the color balance, a
whole new round of lab tests followed, and new prints had to be made
because Bass was such a stickler for color.81
Beginning in August 1983, the film was sent to numerous film festivals and enjoyed immediate success, winning gold medals at the International Film and TV Festival of New York, the International Film Producers
Festival, and the International Film Council. According to Herb Yager,
film distributors were anxious to purchase the rights, but the Japanese
feared political repercussions if the religious film were commercialized,
leading Saul’s partner to complain that they were losing income every
day.82 As a result, the film continued to play only film festivals throughout
1984, including Cannes, Bilbao, Moscow, Houston, Chicago, London,
and San Antonio. When the film played at Filmex in Los Angeles, it was
reviewed by L.A. Weekly, which noted: “The effects choreography and
wide-angle composite shots are outstanding. The sequence with Holst as
the boy runs to a pyramid is galvanizing.”83 Once the film was released
nontheatrically through Pyramid in 1985, it received some strong support
from George Lucas, who had worked with Bass in the late 1960s. Lucas
wrote in Pyramid’s press package: “What makes Quest so extraordinary is
the especially inventive use of special effects. As the hero pursues his quest,
we too, are taken on a journey through another world, created through
original and imaginative effects, and an evocative soundtrack. Quest is a
beautiful and thought-provoking film.”84
Quest relates the story of a people apparently locked behind a cosmic
gate; because they lack sunlight and vegetation, their life span has been
reduced to eight days. According to an elder, many have tried to make the
journey to open the gate, but they all died before they got there. One
child is selected at birth to make the trek and is trained accordingly. On
the second day, he is sent out “to dispel the darkness.” Wandering through
both barren natural landscapes and the architecture of long-extinct cultures, the boy/man confronts a sloth-like monster in a cave, traverses a sea
of sand, plays a board game with a violent ape-man, and makes his way
through a maze and a surfboard game before finally, on the seventh day,
finding and opening the giant gate. He wanders out into the real world,

297

SAUL BASS
where the normal life span is 20,000 days. The light shines on his own
people behind the gate, supposedly bringing them peace, happiness, and
long life.
The Basses structured the film as a journey, as a mythical quest narrative in the sense of Vladimir Propp’s Morphology of the Folktale, whereby
the hero is posed a challenge and is sent out into the world to overcome it;
he is confronted with a series of trials that require him to fight, and his
journey finally ends in victory.85 In keeping with the archaic quest narrative, the doomed people in Quest are dressed in biblical gray robes and
gowns, the men and women wearing black and gray head coverings like
the ancient tribes of Israel. Unlike Bradbury’s completely secular science
fiction story, the Basses’ film looks more like a fantasy or a sword-and-sandal epic. Indeed, the hero in the Bradbury story is a member of a marooned
spaceship team that has to hide in caves because the planet’s environment
has been polluted by radiation; he must travel to another spaceship in less
than an hour’s time, and the life span of the other survivors has been
reduced to eight days. Little else remains of the Bradbury story.
Thus, the first one-third of the thirty-minute film entails choosing a
baby to fulfill the quest and preparing the young hero to do so. He (as
well as the viewer) is told the reasons for his quest. Listening to the heart
of his elder and his own heart, the baby is told: “We are locked away in a
world where our lives speed through time in eight days. No time to see,
to feel, to know, it’s time.” He is taught to fight with a spear, to strategize, to think with the help of objects that simulate games of logic; he is
also given some magical totems that will help him on his journey. As in
many foundational myths (including the birth of Jesus Christ), the birth
is witnessed by many of the tribe’s elders, the lighting on the mother’s
pregnant belly and then on the child visualizing a nativity scene involving
a messianic figure. Even though some of the onlookers express doubt—
“Is this the one?” “It’s too early to tell”—the hero has the markings of
the “chosen one.” Later, when the question is asked again, the baby has
been brought to a table that is lit like an alter from above, creating the
aura of a divine light pointing the way. The infant has no name, imbuing
him with the quality of an Everyman who will lead the way to the light,
but also metaphorically representing any human journey to
enlightenment.
On the second day of his life, the boy leaves the confines of the cave,
crosses a barren landscape, and enters yet another dark cave, where he

298

Journeys of Discovery
confronts and kills a giant sloth with his spear. He has passed his first test.
Interestingly, the monster’s screams can still be heard after the battle, and
the young hero looks around, bewildered, and then screams, “No.” He
says no again, and the sound disappears, as if the monster were just a figment of his imagination, like the psychic id in The Thing. Indeed, as Paul
Ricoeur notes, quest fairy tales often send the hero into some dark forest
where he must face a beast: “These initial episodes do more than merely
introduce the mischief that is to be suppressed; they bring the hero or
heroine back into a primordial space and time that is more akin to the
realm of dreams than to the sphere of action.”86 Given that the elders,
including his birth mother, accompany him spiritually on the journey,
whispering to him not to be afraid, the monster may be seen as a physical
embodiment of the fear he must overcome if he is to be successful in his
quest. Again, the lighting plays a key role, indicating that his fight against
the primordial creature may be a mental one. In part because Bass had no
money to construct a full-sized monster, only parts of the sloth are seen—
specifically, its mouth and claws, with the former possibly being created
through rear projection. The battle takes place in the darkness, shown
with quick crosscutting and clever lighting of the hero, as Bass did with
the cats in Walk on the Wild Side.
The hero must next wade through a flat sea of pure white sand,
which sometimes reaches up to his neck, before he is crushed by a giant
floating rock with a castle on top. Here, Bass reproduces René Magritte’s
1959 painting The Castle in the Pyrenees, which depicts a giant, realisticlooking rock, with a castle on top, that seems suspended above (or is falling into?) the sea. This painting, which defies all logic of gravity, conforms
to the surrealist tenet to make the ordinary strange, forcing the viewer to
see it anew. In the case of the Magritte painting, Elaine confessed that it
had long been Saul’s wish to find a use for that particular image.87 A similar image of a rock suspended in space had already been tested in Bass’s
original Phase IV finale. The suspension of gravity (in the painting) also
implies the obliteration of time, but in Quest, the hero must race against
time to avoid getting crushed by the boulder (short term) and to open
the gate before he dies (long term). Furthermore, while Magritte’s boulder consciously resembles an egg, which in the surrealist canon symbolizes rebirth and fertility, Bass not only throws gravity back into the mix
but also turns the female egg into its opposite, a phallus that ultimately
penetrates the soft sand. The fact that one of the elders, seen earlier dur-

299

SAUL BASS
ing the boy’s training, looks like Salvador Dali is another Bass joke on
surrealist art.
The hero reaches the far shore’s architectural structures, consisting of
three monuments: a hand held up in greeting, the face of an old man, and
a bird’s head with a large beak. The still-descending rock touches down
like a spaceship, throwing dust storms into the air and causing the giant
statues to start to collapse. The bird monument is, in fact, another form
of prophecy of the coming messiah, since at the film’s end, we see the
hero in the real world, surrounded by flocks of birds. Thus, the earthquake bringing about the destruction of the monuments is another part
of the divine plan for the hero. One of the smaller falling monuments
resembles the ant towers in Phase IV, one of several visual quotes from
that film. Another recalls The Searching Eye: one of the huge stone eyeballs
falls out and nearly kills the hero, who explores the stone cavern inside the
statue’s head as the other eyeball falls out behind him; the two empty eye
sockets, with their view of the landscape beyond, create another visual
metaphor for sight. As everything begins to crumble, the hero is suddenly
surrounded by stars and is able to see the whole universe; this allows him
to notice a small entrance, which he jumps into at the last moment, before
being crushed by debris.88 As the hero proceeds through a classical Greek–
style temple, the moving camera work is strongly reminiscent of a similar
scene in The Cardinal. The hero then meets his predecessor, who is preparing to die; he tells the hero to climb the pyramid visible on the horizon, rather than trying to go around it. This is a classic fairy-tale
interdiction, addressed to the hero.
At the top of the pyramid, the hero, now with a beard, is tested again.
He must engage in a game of electronic chess with an ape-man, where the
game’s cones and cubes shoot lasers to destroy their opponents.89 For
Bass, language is an essential measure of intelligence, so it is not surprising
that, despite initially losing half his pieces, the hero outwits the ape, who
pounds his fist on the table, causing sparks to fly, while the hero makes his
escape over a magically appearing causeway. The notion of an ape-man
who can only growl playing a high-tech board game is patently ridiculous
in terms of a logical, realistic narrative, so again the question becomes, is
the hero playing with the animalistic and brutal side of his own psyche?
Next, he finds himself inside the same computer game, where he is the
prey for two opposing cones. Again, he outwits the power manipulating
the pieces. First, he causes one to kill off the other; then he uses the mir-

300

Journeys of Discovery
ror given to him by the elders to deflect the laser back at the attacker, thus
destroying the remaining cone. This magical totem from the elders saves
the day, allowing the hero to “channel the light,” as Mokichi Okada
claimed to have done in 1926.
On the seventh day—another biblical reference—the hero arrives at
the slit in the world and opens the gate by finding the indented palm
prints that exude light. The gate, which at one point resembles a Christian
cross, opens, flooding the people with light. The yellow light moves over
the people below, like the sun rising on a new morning. Jesus Christ
reportedly exclaimed, “I am the light of the world,” so here we see Bass
borrowing Christian metaphors as the hero literally brings light into the
world. The final image of the hero at the crest of a hill in front of an
orange-red setting sun returns the viewer to Bass’s own canon of iconographic images. Okada’s healing light, or Johrei, and Bass’s more pagan
mysticism may not be so far apart. As demonstrated in both The Searching
Eye and The Solar Film, Bass repeatedly depicts the sun—or, rather, sunlight—as the beginning of all life on the planet. Another point of intersection between Okada’s church and Bass is the concept that nothing in life
is easy. Bass formulates that thesis in connection with creativity in The
Searching Eye and, as we will see, in Why Man Creates.
The church interpreted Quest’s narrative as follows: “Confronted
with a world of hardship and difficulties . . . , the film vehemently asserts
that barriers during our journey are the passage ways that must be traversed and the doors that must be opened.”90 Any reading of Quest,
then, must consider it an allegory for Mokichi Okada’s teachings and
therefore a theological text. Church representative Masa Miura makes
this explicit: “The film can be regarded as a joint creation of Saul Bass
and Mokichi Okada. . . . Above all, the journey of the boy full of ordeals
can be construed as a symbolic rendering of the life of great men as
Mokichi Okada.” Miura goes on to state that the film will advance the
causes of the M. Okada International Association, which is “now on the
verge of embarking on a renewed mission on a worldwide basis.”91 Bass
explicitly objected to sharing credit with Okada, but the film had not yet
been shot at that point, so additional discussions about the film’s ideological thrust may have occurred. Against this proselytizing impetus, the
Basses later attempted to contextualize the film in more secular terms.
The Pyramid study guide, for example, notes: “The boy in Quest as well
as Luke Skywalker, James Bond, the Hulk et al. function in exactly the

301

SAUL BASS
same way for contemporary society. Through their adventures they
come ‘to serve as powerful picture language for the communication of
traditional wisdom.’”92
Whether the teachings of the Church of World Messianity constitute
“traditional wisdom” rather than cult worship is open to debate. However, what has been neglected in the discussion up to this point is the role
of the art direction in Quest. In fact, Saul and Elaine saw the film as an
opportunity to play: “We built into the landscape many of the visual ideas
that had fascinated us over the years.”93 In fact, utilizing front and rear
projection, painted mattes, bipack silhouettes, miniatures, and overcranking of the camera, Bass re-creates many of the visual designs first seen in
the “lost” ending to Phase IV. This includes a landscape of what can only
be described as upside-down pyramids, an image Bass reused for the cover
of a psychology textbook.94 Other designs, such as the endless stairs or the
line patterns in the sand, recall both Phase IV and The Cardinal. The
point is that each and every composition is consciously arty, just as the references to surrealist art denote that the environments depicted are landscapes of the mind. In the same vein, the consistent use of three-dimensional
geometric shapes, whether squares, cones, or pyramids, harks back to the
Bauhaus elementary design course. And just as the boy plays with marble
pieces that will later morph into a deadly game of survival on a vast electronic board game, he also constructs a model from steel girders that he
will later have to navigate, an image recalling M. C. Escher.95 Except for
the electronic board game, no computer graphics were used, making the
film’s visual achievements all the more astounding.96
Apart from the overt art history references, how do we interpret the
film’s overall design? It is apparent that Quest is only partially a chronological journey through space in time; it is equally a journey through time
in space. Interestingly, some of Bass’s sketches for the journey resemble
the landscapes of chronological time created for The Solar Film and 100
Years of the Telephone, whereby the present is seen in the foreground and
the future is on the horizon.97 The negative evidence for such a reading
lies in the fact that the spatial relations within the narrative construct make
little to no sense in a realistic context. Where is the gate in relation to the
cave where the people dwell? Why doesn’t the mother travel halfway to
the gate before her child is born? How can the light fall directly into the
cave if the gate is a seven-day journey away? Looking more closely at the
sets, they take the hero from primitive caves to classical Greek temples to

302

Journeys of Discovery
computer landscapes, a journey ostensibly through time rather than space.
This notion fits with Ricoeur’s critique of Propp’s morphology of thirtyone different functions of the narrative quest, noting that the chronological dimension is more or less supplanted by conceptual segmentation:
“The chronological dimension was not abolished, but it was deprived of
its temporal constitution as plot. The segmenting and the concatenating
of functions thus paved the way for a reduction of the chronological to
the logical.”98 A reading that sees the quest as a journey through time, the
hero as an allegorical figure for all humanity, conforms to a theological
interpretation of the text. This “story of mankind,” ending in an embrace
of the church’s teachings, communicates the institution’s belief that it
embodies the highest stage of human development, allowing complete
freedom and harmony with nature. The film’s final images of the hero,
the sun, and the birds signify a reestablishment of balance between man
and nature, a concept that both the M. Okada International Association
and the Basses could agree on.
Bass’s narratives of the journey always imply the acquisition of knowledge
and experience through the act of looking. And yet, while the actors
engaged in the journey function as stand-ins for the audience, Bass often
blocks that identification by privileging his overall visual design, resulting
in a self-conscious audience. The actual act of seeing and of acquiring
knowledge is thereby displaced onto the audience. Indeed, common to all
the characters in the titles and films discussed here is their silence, their
lack of verbal language to express their own thoughts and emotions. They
are merely stand-ins for the audience, which the filmmaker addresses
directly through words and images. For Saul Bass, language and the ability to communicate through language ultimately define civilization.

303

7

Civilization
Organizing Knowledge
through Communication
Saul Bass’s Why Man Creates (1968) begins with an animated scene of
“prehistoric” cave dwellers attempting to kill a steer-like animal more than
twice their size. After the first attempt fails, because the animal is too big
and they are afraid of it, they discuss the matter and decide that one of
them will act as bait while the others spear the animal from behind as it
chases the lone hunter. The dead steer’s image is then reproduced on the
wall of a cave, like the cave paintings in Spain and France dating from the
Aurignacian period onward. In this thirty-second sequence, Bass and Art
Goodman visualize the beginning of civilization, defining it as the moment
when a group of individuals in a community discusses and formulates a
joint plan of action for the common good and then documents in art and
narrative the success of that strategy, making it available to future generations. For Bass, then, art is a way for one generation to speak to the next.
To use the term “prehistoric” is in fact incorrect, since that image is also
the first act of historiography.
Bass’s work is predicated on the supposition that civilization is based
on the development and implementation of language as a mode of communication, whether spoken or pictographic, and that much of that communication is about human history. As banal as it sounds, language allows
people to exchange thoughts, feelings, ideas, and emotions and to understand the point of view of their immediate neighbor. Language is about
getting people together to take common action for the common good.
But it is also about creating traces of our own individual existence and

305

SAUL BASS
about writing history. Human history demonstrates our forward movement, and as a liberal humanist experiencing the post–World War II boom
in American power, society, and economy, Bass believed that civilization
had progressed over the last ten millennia and would continue to develop.
It is no accident that all of Bass’s narratives about the historical development of society, whether in Why Man Creates or 100 Years of the Telephone
or The Solar Film, are structured as journeys to the far horizon; they are
about traveling straight ahead into the future. Despite hiccups, such as the
energy crisis detailed in The Solar Film, Bass believed in human progress,
both social and technological. Indeed, even that film argues that there are
rational solutions to the energy crisis, if we can only agree to implement
them. Even a mystical film like Quest (which takes the hero beyond the
horizon) suggests that the most intractable problems can be solved if
obstacles are faced one at a time and if the knowledge of a civilization is
communicated to its children.
For Bass, all design is about communication, and communication is
what defines civilization. Communication is seen as a creative and intellectual process that is dependent on finding the best possible solution to
a design problem. This is accomplished by focusing attention on the audience’s needs and desires, as well as on the message to be communicated.
The exchange of knowledge is paramount. Communication occurs when
an addressee is taken from something he or she knows and understands to
something he or she doesn’t know. As one journalist noted early in Bass’s
career: “He starts with the premise that the creative act is one that brings
about a new relationship between existing objects or ideas. Mr. Bass
strives, in his work, to share with the consumer or viewer a creative experience.”1 In visual design work, that moment is more telegraphic, even as it
suggests narrative. The same can be said for some of Bass’s title work,
although the element of narrative moves to the fore in many other Bass
titles. In his advertising, promotional, and narrative films, Bass transports
knowledge through narrative, both fictional and nonfictional. Indeed,
just as Bass hoped audiences would see the everyday anew through the act
of consciously seeing, he hoped to rearrange and contextualize commonly
known facts to create an understanding of relationships between things or
to create a narrative explicating the complex social and political processes
at work in society.
However, the focus for Bass is always on the microcosm, on the process and the immediate issue at hand, not necessarily on the theoretical

306

Civilization
construct. In this sense, Bass is a conceptualist, seeing each problem as a
unique puzzle with its own set of practical and rational solutions, rather
than a theoretician who approaches issues through an ideological construct. This, of course, is in keeping with his antitheoretical and anti-intellectual public pronouncements, although even his historical narratives,
which appear to be nothing more than a collection of chronologically
ordered facts, are a priori inflected with ideology. In Bass’s case, that ideology can be characterized as a positivist, socially responsible, and capitalist one; it ascribes agency to individuals rather than to social forces beyond
human control. Even a film like Quest is strangely agnostic, never visualizing or speaking the name of God. Communication and education are
the linchpins of progress, so it is not surprising that many of Bass’s films
analyze difficult problems and find simple solutions but eschew concrete
answers. For his title sequences involving historical subjects, Bass attempts
to set the stage by visualizing events and objects that can contextualize the
narratives that follow. In his short films, Bass tackles complex subjects and
plays with direct audience address, crafting essays that pose many questions and only seldom offer concrete answers. It therefore behooves us to
look at Why Man Creates and Phase IV as exceedingly complex and fragmented narratives whose modernism invites an open-ended dialogue with
the audience but avoids ideological absolutes.

Cowboys and War
Saul Bass’s titles for Delmar Daves’s Cowboy (1958) set the stage for
another adult western that purports to be a realistic look at the history of
the American West during the great cattle drives of the 1870s. Millions of
cattle were driven north from Texas to the railroad lines in Kansas for
transport to Chicago for slaughter and processing. In fact, according to
the Oxford English Dictionary, the word cowboy originated in this period
to describe that particular occupation. Given that Hollywood had already
produced oodles of westerns built around cattle drives, Howard Hawks’s
Red River (1948) being the most famous, the film’s challenge was to
avoid the clichés of the genre. Likewise, Bass’s titles consciously attempt
to undercut any heroic stylization, which the western genre was prone to,
especially to satisfy the Saturday matinee market. Among 1950s westerns,
High Noon, Shane, and Johnny Guitar led the way in this arena. Bass
therefore created animated graphic titles that both play to the genre’s cli-

307

SAUL BASS
chés by utilizing stereotypical western music and humorously deflate the
western cowboy myth by “reading” an advertisement from a Chicago
newspaper, dated 25 March 1872, offering mail-order western goods so
that any tenderfoot can turn himself or herself into a cowboy.
Cowboy was based on a semiautobiographical novel by Frank Harris,
My Reminiscences as a Cowboy (1930), which tells the story of a hotel clerk
who goes west to join a cattle drive from Mexico. The film’s extremely
long preproduction history was no doubt partly the result of Harris’s
meandering plot and the novel’s sexually explicit content, which the
Motion Picture Production Code would have found objectionable. John
Huston bought the rights to the novel in the 1940s and was planning to
produce the film with Sam Spiegel and Horizon Pictures, starring his
father, Walter Huston, and Montgomery Clift. However, Walter died
before the production team completed its other project, The African
Queen (1951), so the property languished. In January 1953 the project
was turned over to Ranald MacDougall, a writer-producer at Columbia;
eighteen months later it was given to producer Jerry Wald, with Peter
Viertel as scriptwriter and Spencer Tracy chosen to play the lead.2 By July
1956, Gary Cooper and Alan Ladd were being mentioned as possible
leads.3 Eventually, the project landed with Julian Blaustein, who had previously produced Storm Center and The Racers and would hire Bass again
for The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse. Bass was hired to do the Cowboy
titles, Jack Lemmon and Glenn Ford landed the leads, and Delmar Daves
was chosen to direct. Given the extreme heterogeneity of the poster
designs and other publicity, it is unlikely that Bass was involved in the
film’s marketing. The animation, however, is very much in keeping with
the style of Around the World in 80 Days, so one can assume that some of
the same individuals worked on Cowboy as well. The script was completed
by Dalton Trumbo, who received no credit as a result of being blacklisted;
Edmund H. North fronted for him.4 Daves, who also directed the classic
western 3:10 to Yuma with Glenn Ford, later claimed that Cowboy was his
favorite western because of its realism.5 The film premiered on 7 January
1958 in Oklahoma City and then opened in New York on 19 February
1958.
Cowboy received mostly tepid reviews. For all the talk about the film
being a realistic look at the hard lives of cowboys on the cattle trail, the
actors looked too well-fed, and the color film was too pretty. Whereas
James Powers was generally positive about Delmar Daves’s indifferent

308

Civilization
direction, Bosley Crowther went for the jugular, noting that the film was
a “routine herd-trailing saddle saga” that made Jack Lemmon look like a
fugitive from the “Hasty Pudding Club.”6 The British Monthly Film Bulletin took a more balanced view: “to the familiar, romantic elements of
the great cattle trek, the film brings something almost iconoclastic: the
group of men on the trail are shown to be a raw and lawless lot . . . the
film fails in its last third, and gives way to stock revisions of character to
ensure a happy ending.”7 Indeed, reviewers generally agreed that Lemmon was miscast in the role of the tenderfoot who becomes a hardened
trail hand.8
Bass’s titles open completely abstractly, similar to his opening for The
Seven Year Itch. Here, a series of six blue and olive-green bars of slightly
different widths fills the frame horizontally; they are overlaid with a variety
of black embroidery stitch patterns before “Columbia Pictures presents”
appears above the horizontal axis. The six bars morph into three thicker
bars in three different shades of blue, and the title appears in wide, white,
serif type at frame left, encased in a rectangle composed of a black doublestitch pattern. As the title fades out, the spatial geometry of the color
fields changes to two horizontal rectangles and a vertical one (right frame),
the stitch pattern now resembling an old-style picture frame around the
credits for Glenn Ford and Jack Lemmon, along with an oval frame
around “starring.” Additional lead actors’ credits appear in frames as the
background is divided into five rectangles in various blue hues. The color
field then dissolves to a reproduction of the Chronicle, a Chicago newspaper on a yellow-brown field to simulate old paper, while the remaining
acting credits appear center-justified in white capitals on three lines below
the horizontal axis. As the white credits fade out, the camera zooms in on
a close-up of an advertisement for a western saddle; Edmund North’s
credit is listed above and the credit for the serialized novel is listed below
in the same-style serif typography. The camera then pans right to an advertisement for men’s hats, while the musical credits are overlaid in white
sans serif capitals. All but one of the hats fades out, and the cowboy wearing that hat fades in while the monochromatic color turns to a wine red;
a white lasso flies horizontally over the screen, dragging a black cowboy
boot back into view as the cinematography credits appear in white. The
boot in the same position becomes part of a newspaper advertisement for
boots with white spurs and then dissolves to a blue field; the spurs morph
into stars, and secondary technical credits appear frame left and left-justi-

309

SAUL BASS
fied, then frame right and right-justified (including Bass’s title credit).
The brief 1:28-minute sequence ends, after an interlude with various cattle brands filling the screen, when Blaustein’s and Daves’s respective credits appear in white in front of a newspaper illustration of a Jersey cow on
a red field.
The titles for Cowboy function on two graphic levels: the color field
and the textual design with the mock newspaper are at the center, while
the narrative details float freely between design elements. Throughout the
credits, Bass references various everyday objects and aspects of the cattle
drive, characterizing this stereotypical nineteenth-century genre piece as
just another day’s labor for ordinary working men. The opening color
scheme, with its preponderance of blues and grays, references the Civil
War and possibly the colors of men’s clothing, while the horizontal
embroidery stitch patterns can be read as a synecdoche for the blue jeans
worn by the cowboys. The constellation of old-time rectangular and oval
picture frames around the names of the major actors playing these longdead cowboys is a device Bass uses again in both That’s Entertainment II
and A River Runs through It. Here (as there), the design communicates
both a sense of nostalgia and a sense of home and family, something most
cowboys didn’t have. The theme of cowboy fashion is continued in the
following newspaper section, which not only reveals the film’s historical
time frame but also catalogs other accessories, including saddles, hats, and
boots. The specific order of the objects in the titles chronicles the transformation of an eastern city slicker into a cowboy—the early hats are
mostly for city dwellers, until a cowboy appears wearing a cowboy hat.
The narrative continues in the following titles as the color field transitions
to Bass’s trademark red, placing visual emphasis on the action that follows: a lasso in an unseen hand ropes a boot, and its spurs dissolve into an
image of open skies on the cattle drive. Finally, Bass incorporates his trademark joke by first visualizing a cow separated into its various cuts of meat
for Blaustein’s credit, maybe indicating that, as producer and holder of
the purse strings, he is a manager of parts rather than the whole. Daves’s
directorial credit is accompanied by the whole living cow before it is led
off to slaughter.
Thus, Bass’s graphic, animated titles communicate historical knowledge through a number of different visual tropes and typographic devices.
Bass’s method is to take one detail and carry it into the next frame: a cowboy hat is suddenly worn by a cowboy, one boot dissolves into an adver-

310

Civilization
tisement for many boots, the spurs become stars in the sky over an open
range. The effect is to create smooth transitions that encourage a narrative
reading. The UPA-style animation, which matches flat color fields with
very simple animated objects, is perfectly suited to Bass’s purpose, which
is to keep the focus on the credits while inviting the audience to combine
the narrative details communicated in the titles and construct the beginnings of a western narrative. At the same time, the visual focus on details—
that is, the objects of everyday life—communicates Bass’s understanding
that these are the historical artifacts that survive—old picture frames,
clothing, newspapers—allowing us to extrapolate images and knowledge
of the past from these historical documents.
In light of what film curator Stephen Harvey called “a bad idea that
became deadlier at every step,” it is probably better that Bass’s montage
sequences for The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse (1962) were eventually
jettisoned in favor of much shorter, less obtrusive, and less violent montages.9 Yet Bass’s original montages are interesting in two ways: as an
attempt to integrate graphic design elements and live-action newsreel
images in a montage sequence, and as templates for his subsequent prologue for The Victors. In fact, that prologue reutilizes virtually the same
edit as one of the Four Horsemen montages (along with some additional
shots), attempting to communicate both historical and ideological knowledge about World War II. Here again, we see Bass’s willingness to take
ideas he pitched unsuccessfully to one client and sell them to another.
While producing a remake of its biggest hit from the silent period,
Ben Hur (1959), someone in the front office at Metro-Goldwyn-Mayer
came up with the idea to remake The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse
(1921), which had been Rudolph Valentino’s break-out film for Metro
Pictures. It is the story of a young Argentine playboy in Paris who learns
the meaning of sacrifice and responsibility in the trenches of World War I.
The original film’s success depended almost wholly on the smoldering
star’s rendition of the tango, which set off a dance craze in the United
States. In July 1958 Julian Blaustein was brought in to produce the
remake, and Vincente Minnelli was set to direct.10 Scriptwriter Robert
Ardrey threw out 90 percent of the original Vicente Blasco Ibáñez novel,
turning it into the story of a playboy in Nazi-occupied France who must
choose between collaboration and resistance. Unfortunately, studio bosses
Sol Siegel and Joseph Vogel decided to cast forty-two-year-old Glenn

311

SAUL BASS
Ford in the lead, who was too old and certainly lacked the androgynous
sexual fire of Valentino; Ingrid Thulin, the Swedish star of Ingmar Bergman films, was equally miscast as the romantic heroine. Minnelli and
Blaustein fought when the budget ballooned from $4.75 million to $7.5
million owing to the director’s overshooting on location in Paris. In
August 1960 Bass was hired “to prepare a montage of posters, newsreels,
press cuttings and photographs from war-time records that will be inserted
as the story unfolds, giving historical backgrounds to the narrative’s
events.”11 Five months after production began in Paris in October 1960,
the film wrapped in Culver City at the Hal Roach Studios in March
1961.12 The film flopped miserably, losing close to $6 million.
It is likely that Bass spent several months in 1961 producing four war
montages, as well as designing some trade advertisements.13 These montages—“Sports Palace,” “Warsaw,” “Rotterdam,” and “La Martinique”—
were supposed to be interspersed throughout the narrative of The Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse. According to Mike Lonzo, Bass’s assistant,
they later served as the basis of the titles for The Victors.14 Jean Douchet’s
contemporary description claims that the montages were not completely
eliminated but only drastically shortened, so that their character as historical evidence was mitigated: “The scenes from newsreels (Nazi meetings,
aerial squadrons, bombardments, etc.) are shattered, anamorphosed, vividly colored—in short dismembered like cubist Picassos. Visible reality is
willfully denied.”15
In the first three montages, each running about 1:20 minutes, Bass
experiments with juxtaposing graphic texts or symbols with historical
newsreel footage in order to make an ideological point about the nature
of World War II. The “Sports Palace” sequence refers to Adolf Hitler’s
famous “Deutschland ist nun erwacht ” (Germany has awakened) speech,
given at the Berliner Sportpalast on 8 April 1933. The newsreel footage,
however, comes almost exclusively from Leni Riefenstahl’s Triumph of the
Will, which postdates the sports palace event by more than a year.16 In the
sequence, Bass moves from close shots of recognizable individuals in the
crowd to arms raised in the Nazi salute to groups of Nazi supporters and
finally to an amorphous mass. That mass is next seen in long shots of
crowds that have been geometrically ordered as phalanxes, ending with
the infamous image of Hitler and his lieutenants marching down a human
corridor created by tens of thousands of followers at the Nuremberg Party
rally in 1935. Bass intercuts these images with graphics of Nazi swastikas,

312

Civilization
in ascending order from three to six to twelve to forty-eight swastikas on
the screen; then he transitions to swastikas forming larger swastikas to
swastikas in rows, as if on parade. Interestingly, neither the propaganda
minister nor any of the Nazi Party leaders are integrated into the montage
(Hitler is heard on the sound track), nor are their supporters visualized as
an amorphous mass oppressed by the Nazi leadership, as in many documentaries. Instead, through the progressive montage from individuals to
masses to militarily ordered masses, Bass emphatically declares that the
German people, made up of individual citizens, enthusiastically support
the Nazi regime and are willing to subjugate themselves to the will of the
Nazi leaders. The swastika graphics, then, become a symbol of that thesis,
as swastikas multiply and Bass lines them up in marching formations, symbolically visualizing the ever-increasing number of Germans subsumed
under the Nazi banner.
The next two montages, encapsulating the Nazi blitzkrieg in Poland
in September 1939 and Holland in June 1940, are similarly constructed
of alternating images and graphics. Both focus on the bombing of cities
and the mass killing of innocent civilians by the German Luftwaffe, rather
than on military actions between opposing armies. The “Warsaw” montage opens with photographs of Hitler in various poses as he gives one of
his war-mongering speeches, the camera moving ever closer to his face
until only his gaping mouth fills the screen (a shot similar to the crying
baby in the Mennen Baby Magic commercial, and presaging the final shot
of the Seconds title sequence). Bass then cuts from the screaming voice of
Hitler to an explosion, followed by numerous other explosions. Bass
inserts a shot of a woman running down the street and falling, as buildings
collapse in rapid succession. (The shots of collapsing buildings were culled
from the MGM feature film San Francisco [1936], about the famous
1906 earthquake. By freezing the image, one can see that the people in
the shot are wearing clothing from the pre–World War I era.)17 Bass then
interlaces various French and other foreign newspaper headlines announcing the bombing of Warsaw, but in negative, so that the headline is white
on a black background. He completes the sequence with images of corpses
intercut with explosions and the sound of warplanes on their bombing
runs.
The planes are only heard in the “Warsaw” montage, whereas the
“Rotterdam” montage begins with shots of bombers and Stukas in formation in the skies, culminating in a striking image of a Stuka diving verti-

313

SAUL BASS
cally through the frame, superimposed on a close-up of a woman’s
anguished face looking up to the sky. As another explosion is heard, Bass
cuts to a montage of graphics, “HOLLAND BOMBED—HOLLAND’S
NEUTRALITY VIOLATED,” in white sans serif capitals on a black background. Intercutting more images of explosions, buildings burning
uncontrollably, and victims (including children) running, Bass then superimposes an image of a dead woman’s face on a shot of Hitler dancing a jig,
which grows larger as he dances. The jig was re-created with a step printer
from a few frames of Hitler in Paris after the French surrender, since the
original shots were apparently too decomposed.18
Both blitzkrieg sequences argue that the German war machine is
driven by invisible forces (no pilots are shown); the bombing wreaks
havoc and destruction on civilians with no regard for human decency.
Images of piles of corpses, as well as close-ups of outstretched, bloody
hands, are particularly brutal, encapsulating the anguish of the civilian
population. Images of Hitler bracket the two montages, symbolically
indicating that he not only ordered the attacks but also rejoiced in the
destruction his Luftwaffe inflicted. Taken together, then, the three montages establish that the Nazis enjoyed popular support and that the German people, along with their leaders, were responsible for starting the
most brutal war ever fought against civilian populations up to that time.
The final montage, “La Martinique,” begins with a shot of Glenn
Ford entering a party filled with French women and Nazi officers. Ford
works his way through the crowd as the revelers drink champagne and
kiss. Bass cuts to a close-up of a bald man laughing, then to an extreme
close-up of his gaping mouth, before inserting a newsreel image of a
machine gun muzzle rapidly firing and the German soldier operating the
gun. After cutting back to the open mouth drinking a glass of champagne,
Bass inserts a shot of a tank’s treads rolling over a dirt road, followed by
more explosions and images of tanks. Bass then returns to Ford’s character in the crowd. The juxtaposition between the Nazi bacchanalia in a
Parisian villa and the images of war further reinforces the brutality and the
insensitivity of the Germans, who wage war against France and then celebrate late into the night. Unlike the other montages, which probably
would have been stand-alone sequences inserted into the fictional narrative, the final montage is integrated into the film’s narrative. The inclusion
of this montage on the surviving reel clearly establishes that all four montages were created for The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse.

314

Civilization
Saul Bass’s two-minute prologue for The Victors is a much more
sophisticated reediting of material from the Four Horsemen montages, as
well as additional material.19 Unlike the war montages, which juxtapose
the mass destruction of the Nazi blitzkrieg and civilian casualties, the prologue of The Victors telegraphs in visual shorthand that the rise of Nazism
and World War II can be attributed to missed opportunities at the end of
World War I. The prologue transitions directly to the two-minute title
sequence, which employs newsreel footage of Allied soldiers marching
down the Champs-Elysées on parade after the liberation of Paris, as well
as other victory parades. This creates a bracket for the narrative that follows, which concerns the actions of American troops from the Battle of
Britain in 1942 to the occupation of Berlin in the spring of 1946.
Carl Foreman had been a hugely successful Hollywood scriptwriter
before being blacklisted in 1951, during the second wave of hearings by
the House Un-American Activities Committee. Like Ring Lardner Jr., Cy
Endfield, Joseph Losey, and others, Foreman moved to the United Kingdom, where he cowrote the Oscar-winning script for The Bridge on the
River Kwai (1956) with fellow blacklistee Michael Wilson, although neither received screen credit or an Oscar. In 1960 he signed a deal with
Highroad Productions and Columbia to write and direct six pictures.20
The Guns of Navarone (1961), for which Foreman was both producer and
scriptwriter, was nominated for a Best Picture Oscar; like his other films,
this was a British production. Bass and Foreman knew each other well;
they had both worked for Stanley Kramer on such films as Champion
(1949), The Men (1950), and Cyrano de Bergerac (1950). In 1957 Foreman bought the rights to Alexander Baron’s The Human Kind (1953), a
volume of short stories about ordinary British soldiers during the war. In
adapting the work, Foreman changed the soldiers to Americans. Preproduction began in 1960, while he was still completing Guns of Navarone.
The film was shot in England, Sweden, France, and Italy between April
1962 and February 1963; it had an international cast, while Foreman
functioned as producer, director, and writer. The three-hour film premiered in London in November 1963 and opened in New York a month
later on 19 December.
Unfortunately, The Victors did not do well at the box office, coming
on the heels of the hugely successful World War II epic The Longest Day
(1962). Indeed, The Victors can be considered a film noir version of The
Longest Day, focusing less on heroic battles against fascism—no actual

315

SAUL BASS
combat footage is seen, other than in Bass’s prologue—than on the loss
of American fighting men due to the scandalous conditions behind the
lines. Foreman links the individual episodes that take the American troops
from London to Italy, Paris, Belgium, and Berlin through newsreel montages that present the course of the war at home and on the front from an
official Allied perspective. In contrast is the unofficial narrative of what
goes on behind the lines, where we see racist white American soldiers killing their African American comrades, boys attempting to sell themselves
to the soldiers, and scores of women of every nationality offering sex for
food or money. The film ends with a Russian soldier and an American soldier in occupied Berlin killing each other in a knife fight because neither
can understand what the other is saying. Given its dark vision of the “good
war,” most American critics panned the film, including Bosley Crowther
in the New York Times and Arthur Knight in the Saturday Review.21 Many
of the reviewers commented on the insertion of newsreels into the film,
especially the inclusion of a segment with Bess Truman trying unsuccessfully to break a bottle of champagne during the christening of a troop
ship.22 Bass was apparently not responsible for these interludes, but he
received praise for his prologue and titles from at least one British reviewer,
who wrote: “Saul Bass’s job is considerably larger than usual. He has to
cover the major military and political events in Europe from about 1914
to 1963, convey the brutality and uselessness of war and do it within a
short prologue to the Foreman film. He succeeds.”23
Bass opens his prologue with a fake newsreel; it is actually a fictional
sequence from All Quiet on the Western Front (1930). The camera moves
laterally along a World War I trench as machine guns (ostensibly behind
the camera) slaughter the soldiers attacking the trench. The camera movement is so fast that the shot seems continuous, but it is in fact made of up
numerous jump cuts of material that has been optically repeated and
speeded up. Meanwhile, Bass keeps the eye centered on the never-ending
stream of bodies being mowed down. The camera movement ends with a
stark photograph of a pair of disembodied hands gripping barbed wire, all
that remains of a soldier. This image is held onscreen for a full four seconds, allowing the eye and mind to rest briefly before cutting to cheering
crowds as an insert of a newspaper headline announces, “GERMANY
SURRENDERS.” Small American flags identify the nationality of the
next crowd, with confetti parades and cheering dominating the sound
track. This is followed by newspaper photographs of Lloyd George,

316

Civilization
Woodrow Wilson, and Georges Clemenceau, then more crowds intercut
with newspaper photographs of their disembodied hands signing the Versailles Treaty. The camera zooms in on the final photo as the cheering
gives way to Hitler’s famous “Germany has awakened” speech, although
the subsequent images of Hitler are from another event. In fact, Bass cuts
together thirty separate photographs (or freeze-frames) of Hitler in less
than ten seconds. The camera zooms in until the last five images reveal a
giant mouth, moving but out of sync with the words screamed on the
sound track. The Hitler segment is identical to the segment in the Four
Horsemen war montages, and like the latter, the first minute of the prologue ends with explosions. The second minute begins with shots of
fighter and bomber squadrons in the air, engines screeching, then cuts to
the vertical dive-bomb of a Stuka. This dissolves to a multiple exposure of
a woman looking up at the sky in anguish—these twelve seconds taken
from the “Rotterdam” montage. The following montage of people fleeing, explosions, and buildings falling down reworks the Four Horsemen
montages, adding flash-frames of disembodied and partially mangled
hands reaching up or out and a shorter edit of Hitler dancing a jig over
the image of a dead woman’s face. After several more explosions, the
screen dissolves to black and the film’s first title.
The film’s title is captured in white sans serif typography on a black
background. All the remaining titles also appear in white, but the background consists of army newsreel footage of various Allied armies marching in parades, all in the same direction and seemingly at the same speed.
Only the uniforms change from British to American to Australian to
French to Russian, while the credits fade in and out and a military march
blares on the sound track. The title sequence lasts less than two minutes,
so the whole opening clocks in at four minutes of screen time. The original prologue was apparently much longer, but Bass was forced to cut it.24
Bass’s original storyboards for The Victors reveal that the designer was still
experimenting with typographical elements moving around the screen,
integrated into the newsreel footage, and sometimes even on top of it, as
in the “Rotterdam” title over a sky full of planes or the disembodied
hands raised in the air behind “ARMISTICE.” However, his storyboards
jettison the rather one-dimensional use of newspaper mock-ups in favor of
pure typography laid out graphically rather than in real space.25
The official description of the prologue in the Bass Papers reads as follows: “The prologue outlines in documentary form the historical back-

317

SAUL BASS
ground to this war: the destruction during World War I, the Versailles
Peace, the rise of Hitler, his attack on Europe, and the battle of Britain . . .
where the story begins.”26 Although this description is technically correct,
it hardly describes what is actually seen. First, it should be noted that 60
percent of the prologue involves images of war, as Bass juxtaposes the
senseless slaughter of men in combat during World War I with the targeted killing of civilians in World War II. The ominous drum heard at the
beginning of the epilogue sounds like it is playing a funeral march for
victims in both wars. Whereas the machine-gun sequence from World
War I begins without warning, just as that war had no rational cause,
World War II is ascribed directly to Adolf Hitler. Hitler seemingly proclaims war, a bomb explosion actually emanating from his facial orifice.
Bass ends the prologue with the haunting image of a corpse superimposed over a process shot of Hitler dancing a jig. The optically printed
Stuka attack that initiates the World War II sequence resembles a ballet
of death, with its repetition of overlapping action shots. Here, Bass takes
a page from Sergei Eisenstein’s playbook: in October, the opening of a
drawbridge illustrates the theoretical point that such a montage extends
cinematic time for dramatic emphasis. The next image, a dive-bombing
Stuka superimposed on an old woman looking up, perfectly encapsulates
the prologue’s ideological point: that Hitler has ordered his war machine
to target civilians. The remaining war sequence is an expressionist montage of war victims running for cover—including the de rigueur woman
with a baby (again recalling Eisenstein, but this time, Potemkin)—bombs
exploding, and buildings collapsing, all signifying the chaos of war. Bass
also intercuts flash-frame images of disembodied hands reaching in from
various sides of the film frame, yet another expressionistic, pars pro toto
device to signify pain, suffering, and death without actually showing the
last. Unlike the war montages from Four Horsemen, no actual corpses are
seen, except for the final close-up of the woman in whose image Hitler
dances a jig before more explosions introduce the titles. For those in the
know, Hitler danced that jig on 22 June 1940 as the French army surrendered outside the General Foch railway car in the forest of Compiègne, the same place where the armistice ending World War I had been
signed. Thus, the prologue actually ends historically with the fall of
France. Strikingly, the prologue contains no images of actual soldiers,
Nazi or otherwise, only the unrelenting attack of seemingly unmanned
warplanes. Ultimately, Bass’s images of war are drained of all but the

318

Civilization
most elementary of historical markers, gliding into the stereotypical.
Bass’s editing, resulting in an average of one image per second, creates a
kinetic movement that appeals directly to the audience’s emotions
through the dichotomy of aggressor and victim.
Bass’s images of peace are of a different sort. He intercuts cheering
crowds the moment peace is declared, as well as throughout the “Versailles” sequence introducing the national leaders. The masses are clearly
identified by nationality, so peace is depicted as an international project.
The peace demonstrations disappear on both the sound track and the
screen when Hitler’s voice is heard, indicating that popular support does
not extend to the German dictator. Even though the signatories of the
Versailles Treaty are identified, their disembodied hands as they sign it
remain anonymous, curiously draining their actions of agency. This
impression is strengthened by the fact that Hitler’s voice overwhelms the
silent hands. Hitler, in contrast, is invested with an incredible amount of
vitality and force, thanks to the animation of his hands and mouth; like
the German words he is screaming, his actions are unintelligible but
threatening nevertheless. The image of the gaping and agitated mouth is
a horror vision, and as noted earlier, Bass will use it again in Seconds and
Phase IV. In the latter, the round entrance to the ant colony perfectly
matches these previous images, but in The Victors, the orifice signifies the
mouth of a cannon firing its deadly load.
If Bass’s editing of the prologue communicates the chaos, death, and
destruction of war through compositional juxtapositions of movement,
action, and form, then his title sequence communicates peace as nothing
more than preparation for another war. Whereas the prologue is all jump
cuts, the title sequence employs the principles of continuity editing to create a seamless parade of soldiers from all the nations participating in the
Allied victory. All the men, regardless of their uniform, appear happy,
while their regulation marching and Bass’s cutting on form create a sense
of unity. The parade is transparently a montage of many different parades
of armed soldiers, each marching separately in his own physical space, as
indicated by the environments visible at the fringes of the film frame. The
irony lies in the martial spirit of the marching band heard on the sound
track, supporting the elegant, formal design of military bodies in motion
crashing against the actual reality of the war, which did not end but rather
morphed into the Cold War. Whether Bass constructs one victory parade
or many new parades for the Cold War era, he anticipates the film’s final

319

SAUL BASS
ironic scene in which former allies kill each other simply because they
can’t communicate.
The prologue and title sequence thus perfectly complement each
other. Bass uses the formal tools of film montage to communicate complex historical processes in a minimum amount of time. As a matter of
course, historical processes are merely telegraphed through stereotypical
signification, yet their aesthetic force more than compensates. Ideologically, the Bass sequence makes a strongly pacifist argument by demonstrating the horrors of war on the one hand and the support for peace on
the other. At the same time, the opening montage articulates a “great
man” theory of history—that is, national leaders define the course of
events. Meanwhile, the political and social forces that brought Hitler to
power are invisible, unless one considers the jump cut from Versailles to
Hitler to be a definitive statement that his rise was the direct result of the
harsh peace negotiated there. Of special interest is the fact that the peace
is communicated through newspaper headlines, yet the newspaper as a
mode of communication disappears in the war segments; even the typographic communications suggested in the storyboards are gone.
Bass’s titles for Cowboy and his various war montages for The Four
Horsemen of the Apocalypse and The Victors attempt to communicate complex historical processes through the visual shorthand of film montage,
whereby highly iconographic images from history are juxtaposed in a
semantic chain. With his short films, Bass would go even further in developing his editing skills to communicate complex information about the
world.

Apples and Oranges
Completed in 1962 as a promotion for the Columbia Broadcasting Network (CBS), Apples and Oranges is a thirteen-minute live-action and animated work that extols for advertisers the virtues of the relatively new
medium of television.27 It compares television’s reach to the numbers
achieved by supposedly less efficient traditional print media such as magazines. Based on a scientific marketing study commissioned by CBS and
executed by Audits and Survey Company and Eugene Gilbert & Company
over a two-year period in 1960–1961, Apples and Oranges clearly demonstrates television’s superiority.28 The study was the brainchild of Jay Eliasberg, director of CBS-TV’s Research Department, and it was obviously

320

Civilization
conceived to increase CBS’s advertising revenue.29 Bass was hired to make
the short through the intervention of Louis Dorfsman, creative director of
CBS-TV and a longtime friend. The goal was to transform the forty-fivepage market analysis into an “easily digestible film form for advertising
executives.”30 Bass probably designed the cover and promotional material
for the study as well, since the cover image depicting half an apple and half
an orange held together with a measuring tape is pure Bass.31 According to
one industry trade periodical, Bass designed the film, but it was produced
and directed by Dorfsman and George Bristol, head of advertising and
sales promotion.32 As Bass noted in an article on the film: “We had to make
a story of research. This meant that we had to first understand the message
ourselves. Then we used our creativity as a vehicle for delivering it clearly
and concisely.”33 Part of the problem was that many advertising executives
did not accept the premise that print and TV advertising were comparable.
They believed the two media were like apples and oranges—hence the title.
Beginning in February 1963, the film was screened for advertising agency
executives in New York and ten other major cities.
Apples and Oranges begins by making the point that measuring the
actual numbers of households or individuals reached by television and by
print media is not a valid comparison. In fact, Bass stacks the deck from
the beginning. In discussing magazines, Bass uses moving typography
that has been split on its own horizontal axis (in the style of Psycho),
remaining largely illegible; then he cuts to invisible hands flipping through
magazines and a montage of printing presses. The sequence ends with a
large pair of scissors cutting a string that holds a bundle of magazines
together (reverberations of The Shrike), punctuating the fact that television is now competing with magazines for advertising dollars. Television,
viewers are told, has penetrated 50 million homes, with potential consumers paying much more attention to television than to newspapers or magazines; these statements are accompanied by an exciting montage of
television content. Placing film images in a television vignette, Bass seamlessly intercuts shots of Judy Garland, Danny Kaye, Red Buttons, Lucille
Ball, Jackie Gleason, Jack Benny, and Ed Sullivan; news images of Nikita
Khrushchev, Fidel Castro, and Jackie Kennedy; and scenes of sporting
events, all of which make a much more immediate impression. The introduction concludes that even though television reaches millions of households each evening, “these were audiences you could barely compare, like
apples and oranges.”

321

SAUL BASS
After filling the screen with numbers, a device Bass would use again in
Why Man Creates and The Solar Film, the piece transitions to an animated
sequence of apples and oranges being sliced in front of the numbers. Meanwhile, the audience is told that a new CBS study of audiences “moves
beyond this stalemate to focus on the total advertising effect of each
medium.” Indeed, the film proclaims that rather than studying the medium
itself, this analysis focuses on the effect achieved by each advertisement,
regardless of medium. In other words, Apples and Oranges employs the
tools and language of empirical communications research, as it developed in
the post–World War II United States. To make the study look even more
scientific, Bass invokes a mathematical formula: size of audience (x) times
response per unit of audience (y) equals total advertising effect (E), or (x)
(y) = E. In this equation, variables can change, but the effect remains the
same. Bass visualizes this equation with extremely simple graphics, placing
white heads with smiley faces in cubes on vertical and horizontal axes, with
either a rectangular television screen or turning pages in each square.
According to Apples and Oranges, the CBS study identified four ways
in which people respond to advertisements: awareness of the product,
belief in the product, evaluation of the product, and desire to buy the
product. In the study, CBS marketing researchers sought to measure the
effect of thirteen different products advertised in various print media and
on eighteen different television shows on all three networks. To measure
actual changes in attitudes, carefully selected interviewers questioned
more than 6,000 interviewees nationwide, including wives, husbands,
and parents, to establish a baseline before exposure to advertising media;
the participants were then reinterviewed after exposure. Bass visualizes
the CBS interviewers as silhouetted figures with hats who bear a strong
resemblance to the gangster icons Bass created for advertisements for
KLH Research and Development Corporation (1957) and Some Like It
Hot (1959).34 However, the silhouetted design likely also reminded viewers of the newly popular “Spy vs. Spy” cartoon characters created by
Antonio Prohías for Mad Magazine. The spy connection was not unintentional, as Bass noted: “Research of this type is really a socially approved
kind of spying.”35 Interviewees were questioned immediately after exposure to advertisements in magazines and five minutes after television viewing. The total audience response was then divided by the number of
advertising dollars spent. After crunching the numbers, indicated onscreen
by moving computer punch holes, television turned out to be 25 percent

322

Civilization
more effective than magazines in increasing product awareness, 42 percent more effective in creating belief in a product, and 100 percent more
effective in product evaluation and encouraging a desire to buy. While the
actual study named the advertised products under scrutiny (e.g., Bayer
aspirin, Dial soap, Ford Falcon, Kellogg’s corn flakes), the film lists no
brand names, the goal being to speak to all advertisers.
Clearly, the actual study and the filmic presentation by CBS were
addressed to companies that might be potential advertisers. For Bass, this
short film was his first attempt at an essay film, a form he would perfect
with Why Man Creates. The essay film implements heterogeneous media
and varied cinematic forms and styles to communicate complex systems of
knowledge. Mixing various media or juxtaposing graphics, photography,
painting, and typography was an important aesthetic strategy at the Bauhaus and one that Bass would repeatedly use. In Apples and Oranges, Bass
utilizes moving and layered typography to suggest the visual confusion of
print media, just as he uses live-action documentary images to suggest the
real-world immediacy of television and animated graphs and symbols to
visualize outcomes. Basic shapes such as squares, diamonds, circles,
crosses, arrows, and asterisks signify different responses to different media,
while pictographs such as sliced apples and oranges in a slot machine
image (like the one Bass used for Ocean’s Eleven) signify that vendors are
gambling with their advertising dollars if they don’t analyze scientific data
on the effectiveness of their work. Human heads that look more like white
spoons represent interviewees, with television interviewees slightly
rounder than their news-reading counterparts; abstract images of flipping
pages and a round-edged TV screen further specify readers and viewers,
respectively. Indeed, the spoon heads made an appearance as actual spoons
with faces in Bass’s advertisement for Manufacturers National Bank a year
earlier.36 The hat- and coat-wearing “spies” represent the legions of interviewers, identified in some shots by CBS’s eye logo under a hat. An outstretched and disembodied hand also comes into play, pointing to data, as
do Bass’s trademark computer punch holes, signifying the crunching of
data.37 At another point, Bass employs the graphic map from Four Just
Men, consisting of lines and house symbols, to visualize the distribution of
households interviewed. Finally, as in the case of the trade ads for Some
Like It Hot, Bass injects many humorous moments, such as when a very
tall interviewer opens his coat to reveal that he is sitting on the shoulders
of a colleague.38 Later, Bass animates scores of interviewers tiptoeing

323

SAUL BASS
across the screen in straight rows, going in opposite directions. Other
visually inventive and humorous tricks include combining slices of apples
and oranges into one fruit or coloring an interviewee in various rainbow
colors to indicate willingness and desire to buy a product.
Apples and Oranges thus utilizes heterogeneous cinematic devices,
including animation, live-action documentary images, moving typography, graphs, and even clearly defined segments, to visualize and communicate complex intellectual concepts emerging from an empirical study. It
is the form Bass would come to prefer for his own independent films,
always mixed with an ample amount of humor.

100 Years of the Telephone
In celebration of the centenary of Alexander Graham Bell’s invention of
the telephone—or, more accurately, the founding of the Bell Telephone
Company in 1877—the company commissioned Bass to make a short
film to demonstrate the telephone’s place in the history of the United
States. Bass was a natural for the project, given that he had coordinated
Bell’s corporate identity makeover in 1969. According to dates on various
treatments for the project, Bass was first approached sometime before
November 1975. The first treatment indicates that Bass initially proposed
a much longer live-action film called The One Hundred Year Old Man.
That film would have started with a live-action interview with a 100-yearold man who had won an essay contest in 1889 at age of thirteen, a plot
structure similar to that of the popular Arthur Penn film Little Big Man
(1970). The script then proposed presenting a series of flashbacks of his
memories, including attending the St. Louis World’s Fair (1904), participating in the Lafayette Escadrille during World War I (1917), and serving
as an air-raid warden in World War II (1940). Another of the eight different draft scripts and treatments in the Bass Papers developed live-action
historical vignettes around various telephone models: the Butterstamp
wall telephone (1878), a Blake desk set (1880), a magnet wall set (1907),
a pedestal desk set (1910), a desk set with combined receiver (1930), a
500-type color desk set (1954), a princess phone (1959), Touch-Tone
(1968), and so forth.39 Although no correspondence with the sponsor
survives, one can assume that such a live-action film would have cost
much more than Bell was willing to spend. A production schedule reveals
that a preproduction story meeting was to be held on 10 December 1975,

324

Civilization
where it was agreed that final delivery of a two-inch high-band videotape
would take place sometime in March 1976.40 It is unknown whether that
schedule was maintained, but the Bass office sent the completed threeminute animated film to the Journées Internationals du Cinema
d’Animation–Festival d’Annecy in June 1977 and to the Melbourne
International Film Festival in August 1978. The film’s production date is
1977, so one can assume that production continued well into 1976.41
The style of 100 Years of the Telephone is similar to the animation Bass
and Art Goodman would design two years later for the historical time line
in The Solar Film. The structure, however, is identical, with the camera
(image) moving from the foreground to the horizon (background)
through time, just as the upward camera movement in Why Man Creates
signifies the passage of time by creating a temporal chronology from the
floors of a building. Likewise, the Bass-Goodman animated sequences
have similar lengths of three minutes (Telephone and Solar) and four minutes (Why Man Creates). In 100 Years of the Telephone, the actual years are
carved in huge stone edifices, marking the passage of time, while historical
scenes are embedded in the rock or take place at the foot of the stone cliff.
Thus, the film fades in on Alexander Graham Bell with an “entrepreneur”
who wants him to give up on his invention and invest in an industry with
a future—namely, high-button shoes—as a huge granite 1876 looms in
the background. Next, a covered wagon with a Bell Telephone logo on it
rides up to the stone edifice, and a cable is pulled from the back to hook
up to the number. For 1879, Thomas Edison, holding a lightbulb,
obsesses about being a failure until he plugs it into the wall, after which he
screams, “I’m a success.” The opening of the Brooklyn Bridge literally
connects 1883 and 1884, while 1888 sees the inauguration of the Statue
of Liberty with fireworks; everything is washed away by the Johnstown
flood in 1889, and Teddy Roosevelt’s Rough Riders make an appearance
in 1898. In 1905 Albert Einstein calls his mother to tell her he has
invented the theory of relativity, while in 1909 Admiral Robert Peary and
Roald Amundsen argue about whether they are to meet at the North Pole
or the South Pole.42 Other historical markers include Woodrow Wilson’s
Fourteen Points (1919), the Scopes monkey trial (1925), the introduction of talking pictures (1929), a GI in a telephone booth (1943), the
moon landing (1969), the American bicentennial (1976), and finally a
new Bell Telephone truck hooking up a giant Touch-Tone phone in front
of the 1977 edifice, completing a full 100 years.

325

SAUL BASS
Like the Einstein and Wilson panels, many of the events depict individuals talking on the telephone with their mothers or spouses, giving Bass
the opportunity to inject healthy portions of humor into the proceedings.
For example, when Einstein says, “I have just discovered the theory that
could change the entire conception of the universe,” his mother says,
“That’s all right, son, so long as you keep in touch with your mother.” An
astronaut’s mother tells him much the same thing when he calls from the
moon. This stereotype of the overbearing mother is a universal one, but it
also had a specifically Jewish connection for Bass and Goodman. In other
humorous episodes, a reporter calls his editor during the Scopes trial and
says: “No, get this, chief, in the famous evolution trial John Scopes today
made his boldest statement ever!” “Well, I’ll be a monkey’s uncle.” “Yeah!
That’s just what he said!” Other jokes are more visual, such as when the
1929 edifice cracks and crumbles to the ground, symbolizing the stock
market crash. Another visual joke involves a GI telephoning home during
World War II (1943): as he stands in the phone booth, a large poster
behind him warns, “The Enemy Is Listening,” and features Hitler’s oversized ear. For the bicentennial year 1976, the edifice is draped in American
flag patterns, while a rally and celebrations take place at its base. The telephone is invariably placed in the center of well-known historical events that
have affected the course of the nation. The events chosen range from those
instigated by “great men” and those social events affecting large parts of
the population, such as the migration to California during the Great
Depression and the migration to suburbia (and the advent of drive-in theaters) during the 1950s. Although the chronology theorizes that the telephone was central to American history, the construction is artificial, since
virtually none of the events depicted depended on the telephone per se.
Indeed, the film merely demonstrates that the telephone could have been
instrumental in communicating these events to the rest of the world. The
chronological movement of history is thus connected to communication
in general and to the telephone in particular, implying that civilization’s
body of knowledge is itself a function of communication.

Why Man Creates
Saul Bass deservedly won an Academy Award for his short film Why Man
Creates (1968), which is undoubtedly his greatest achievement as a filmmaker.43 Creating a free-form essay that directly addresses audiences, Bass

326

Civilization
utilizes an extremely heterogeneous set of formal elements to probe and
question the nature of creativity, without providing any definitive answers;
instead, he develops an open-ended structure that engages the audience.
Eschewing an actual head title, Bass writes the subtitle in pencil on a piece
of paper in the first image: “A series of explorations, episodes & comments on the nature of creativity,” immediately indicating that his personal and subjective essay film will be both nonlinear in its narrative and
experimental in its form. As one critic noted: “Bass relished in the openended and fragmentary nature of his subject matter, taking every opportunity to explore and play with ideas, while avoiding the need for a
unifying or stridently singular metaphorical thread throughout.”44 The
irony and the beauty of Why Man Creates are that its open-endedness is as
much a product of Bass’s aesthetic concept as it is the outcome of the preview process by corporate executives and others consultants, who in their
sheer numbers formed a significant audience.45
Bass started thinking seriously about creativity in the mid-1950s, especially after the Russians sent Sputnik into orbit and Americans began to
worry about the nation’s education and science gap. Bass participated in
various conference programs; in 1958 he attended the New York Art Directors Club Visual Communications Conference on Creativity, and in 1959
he spoke at a Westinghouse-sponsored conference on creativity at Stanford
University.46 In “A Definition of Creativity,” Bass theorized tongue-incheek to his old Jewish mamele that creativity is getting someone else to do
your work for you, to execute your ideas. More seriously, he wrote in the
same piece: “If we understand the act to be an insight that establishes a new
relation between existing concepts or objects, each creative act is a nonconforming act.”47 Indeed, this vacillation between off-the-cuff, even flippant humor and the seriousness of his purpose also characterizes Why Man
Creates. Bass apparently believed that humor was a necessary part of the
learning process if boredom leading to noncommunication was to be
avoided. As Bass noted in an interview: “If you laugh with an idea you are
opening yourself to it.”48 But Bass also considered nonconformity to be
essential for creativity. In an article published in the British Journal of the
Royal Society for the Encouragement of Arts, the designer wrote: “The creative personality is essentially non-conforming. If we understand the creative act to be an insight that establishes a new relation between existent
concepts or objects, then we must accept the fact that to one degree or
another, each creative act is a non-conforming act. The creative personality

327

SAUL BASS
sees something that is not seen by others, and this insight may or may not
be in conformity with the general view on the matter.”49
Originally the brainchild of Robert Sandberg, Kaiser Aluminum and
Chemical Company’s vice president of public relations and advertising, and
inspired by several issues of Kaiser’s company magazine,50 the film was
apparently in preproduction by September 1966. According to Bass: “This
was intended to be essentially a recruiting film. It was aimed at scientists and
engineers in the East—Silicon Valley didn’t exist in those days. Kaiser’s theory was if they could show how aluminum was being used creatively and
how Kaiser was a hell of a great place to be, then that would be exciting for
a creative engineer or scientist.”51 It is interesting to speculate whether
Sandberg went to Bass because of his track record with rival ALCOA. In
any case, Bass wrote to William Riley of Young & Rubicam to get advice on
the proposed “Kaiser film.” Among other issues, Bass worried that creativity was too broad a topic: “This general area of ideas is so vast that there is
a great danger that the film may degenerate into a marvelous but incohesive
[sic] stew of goodies.”52 What becomes clear from the surviving production
files is that this film, presumably like Bass’s other sponsored films, was influenced by the sponsors and other opinion leaders Bass trusted. Though not
exactly produced by committee, Why Man Creates went through a lengthy
and intense preview and revision process that rivaled anything the major
motion picture studios had done in the classical era.
Bass started by making undated and seemingly random notes to himself about the film. Some of these bear quoting because they give insight
into the designer’s creative process. On one page Bass writes: “Creativity
not a joy, not rational—messy—not like picking a diamond, more like sitting in a room full of junk.” The junk Bass refers to is the infinite variety
in the world and the depth of our historically accumulated knowledge and
art, which feeds into the present. This may have been the germ of the idea
for a section called “The Edifice.” Some of his notes morph into images
that Bass will utilize in “The Edifice,” such as “Beethoven’s chord, 3rd
symphony,” or a drawing of two telegraph operators sending messages to
each other from adjacent tables. On another page, Bass scribbled an idea
that would become his “Judgment” sequence:
Indian arrows/grand central
Cowboy shootout/Wilshire shoppers demonstrate “cause and effect
relationship” (Ideas of yesterday have they an effect today?)

328

Civilization
On another page he put down two ideas that would evolve into the “Parable” and “Judgment” sequences: “Ball rolling . . . Argument between
two points of view (society vs. individual).” On yet another piece of paper:
“Not a story as such but a series of episodes which the viewer relates to
each in his own way and it will be different for some from others. Thus,
you will become part of the film and complete the process.”53 Here, Bass
is consciously designing a film that maximizes audience subjectivity—a
much more radical notion of creativity than that envisioned by the Kaiser
executives, who may have tended toward a Tolstoyan view of art, or something akin to art for Everyman. Thus, even before a script was completed,
Bass was already focusing on a more open-ended structure that would not
predigest content for the viewer but present ideas for each viewer to process individually, effectively constructing his or her own film.
On 19 December 1966 Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Company
and Saul Bass signed a design and film production agreement that obligated Kaiser to finance a film on creativity.54 By February 1967, a first
script had been completed and sent to Kaiser for comment, consisting of
the following parts: “The Stimulus. The Process. The Judgment. The
Problem. The Beginning. The Mark.”55 Production must have started
almost immediately, because the first edit of the film was finished by
November.56 Since the original storyboards presented to Kaiser survive on
twenty-nine eight- by ten-inch photographic contact sheets, we have a
good idea of Bass’s initial proposal. Utilizing actors who did not appear in
the final film, and structured around a countdown, the story opens with a
go-go dancer and then intercuts various modes of communication—typewriters, telephones, switchboard panels, and computers—before transitioning to a jumping-jacks sequence in traffic. A body builder training at
Muscle Beach is followed by a series of images of industrial pipes. The
remaining images follow the outline below, reflecting the November
1967 edit. Some key images from the original concept have already been
removed (as indicated by the gaps in the numbers), including a sequence
of a child growing up juxtaposed with shots of a Jewish ghetto child (who
doesn’t grow up); a man shooting an arrow into the heavens, followed by
a rocket penetrating space; a very short animated sequence with an ant
and a tree; and some modern art reproductions.57
1. Main title 33.5 sec
2. Head Openings 1 min 35 sec

329

SAUL BASS
4. All together 50 sec
5. Gastro-Intestinal 51.5 sec
7. Eggs Cracking 18.5 secs
8. Number Dialogue 33.5 secs
10. Anatomy lecture 25 secs
12. Human Forms Nature 26 secs
13. Process (includes creators) 5 min 6.5 secs
14. Seeds 46.5 secs
15. Judgment 2 min 43 secs
16. Parable 2 min 41 secs
17. Digression 20 secs
18. Edifice 3 min 50 secs
19. Problem 4 min 21 secs
20. Mark 4 min 11.5 secs
21. The End 48 secs58
The film was shot on 16mm color reversal film, which Bass hoped to
blow up to 35mm for theatrical distribution, thus qualifying the film for
the Oscars.59 According to once source, the production budget was
approximately $200,000; however, Kaiser’s total outlay, including the
cost of prints and promotion, eventually exceeded $400,000, of which
Kaiser needed to recoup $298,988.36.60
Once the first edit was completed, the film began an intensive period
of previews. First, it was shown to numerous executives from Kaiser and
Young & Rubicam at the latter’s headquarters on 21 February 1968.
After the screening, Bass removed the original head title, which consisted
of white sans serif typography on a black background: “Documents
under the general heading . . . why . . . man . . . creates.” He also
removed the typographic digits for the chapter headings, which left the
audience at sea as to what was coming next but also objectified the segmentation.61 It was Bass’s friend Lou Dorfsman who suggested eliminating the countdown at the end of the film and “telling it straight” in the
titles. Both he and Don Fabun from Kaiser also complained about the
excessive length of the “Parable” and “Judgment” chapters. Others commented that the footsteps in the sand at the end of the film were depressing and anticlimactic.62 In fact, Bass’s intention had been to engage the
viewer as a potential artist-creator (supporting a Tolstoyan Everyman
point of view) with a final direct invitation inserted after the footsteps in

330

Civilization
the sand. In the final script, a Teletype machine spews out the following
message: “VISION NEEDED . . . CREATIVE IMPULSE UNIVERSAL . . .
CULTIVATED WITH CURIOSITY . . . FREEDOM INTENSITY . . . WONDERFUL
THINGS CAN HAPPEN . . . STARTING WITH YOU . . . REGARDS.” Following
the Teletype, Bass inserted images of fingers on piano keys, a brush on a
canvas, and a beaker with a flame that grows until it fills screen (shades of
Exodus). However, executives found this ending confusing, and they
were unsure of Bass’s purpose. And indeed, although the three images
signify three areas of human creativity, and the growing flame visualizes
the increasing passion for creativity, there are too many final messages
here. Thus, it is possible that the previewed film ended with only the
footsteps in the sand.
Kaiser was apparently uneasy about the innovative ellipses, seeming
non sequiturs, and staccato montage cutting, and it needed authoritative
reassurance about the film’s corporate value.63 It is not known whether
there was any critique of the human forms sequence, which featured
female art nudes, but that part was also omitted in the final cut. Finally, a
corporate statement of purpose by Kaiser prefacing the film was eliminated in favor of a program guide, at the suggestion of executives from
Lamb Kelley and Young & Rubicam.64 As a result, Kaiser published a
fancy, full-color twelve-page brochure that included reproductions of
approximately fifty frames from the film and a note by Kaiser’s president,
T. J. Ready Jr., to clarify the company’s position.65 Subsequently, Bass
made further cuts, including the gastrointestinal sequence, made up of
shots of industrial pipes in a factory while a speaker discusses food; changed
the ending, adding handwritten title cards; and, possibly most important,
moved “The Edifice” sequence to the front of the film.
By the spring of 1968, Kaiser had distributed the film through Modern Talking Pictures to hundreds of schools, churches, and civic groups,
always carefully documenting audience numbers and comments. While
some negative comments remained, the film’s reception was now largely
positive. By the summer, the film was also being reviewed in mainstream
newspapers. In August 1968 Why Man Creates had its Los Angeles theatrical premiere at the Laemmle Los Feliz, sharing the bill with Jacques
Demy’s Les Demoiselles de Rochefort; however, it was advertised as
Thoughts on Creativity.66 The film played for two weeks, possibly to qualify for the Academy Awards, but further theatrical screenings never
materialized.67 Probably thanks to Lou Dorfsman, “The Edifice” was

331

SAUL BASS
shown on nationwide television during the 24 September premiere of
CBS’s 60 Minutes.68
Once Why Man Creates won an Academy Award, it really took off.
Indeed, as reviews began to appear in various magazines devoted to education, it became clear that teachers were embracing the film. It also
helped that the Educational Film Library Association gave Why Man Creates an award as best commercial public relations film.69 One reviewer
wrote: “I think that this little film does pretty well what it sets out to do—
suggest that we relax, let our imaginations have free rein once in a while,
and, stop looking at the world one way.”70 In Art Education Magazine,
another reviewer wrote: “One cannot help but feel strains of Moliere’s
satire, of Shakespeare’s humanism, of surrealist incongruity, and of the
playful but profound paintings of Paul Klee.”71 However, it was a series of
articles by David A. Sohn (at least one of which was republished in Pyramid’s catalog) that really helped the film reach its audience of educators.72
As noted on one website, the film was screened in elementary and high
schools throughout the 1970s: “Many adults who were schoolchildren
during this time have extremely fond memories of Bass’ film.”73
The film’s huge success led to more tensions with Kaiser. The company had been distributing the film more or less for free, and Bass thought
his design firm should be participating in profits beyond a net 25 percent.74 In the summer of 1969 Pyramid was given a nonexclusive contract
to distribute the film to the nontheatrical market.75 Unlike in the theatrical market, where earnings start high and taper off as the film runs its
course, earnings in the nontheatrical market tend to increase over time, as
more and more schools and colleges purchase or rent the film for classroom use. Indeed, according to the Hollywood Reporter, the film had
grossed more than $1.3 million through rentals and the sale of about
4,000 copies by late 1977.76 For Bass & Associates, this meant that it initially received checks from Pyramid totaling about $15,000 a year (in
1971); by 1975, fourth-quarter earnings alone reached $8,444, and in
1976 it earned $35,991.53 over the course of the year.77 One can assume
that earnings continued at this level at least until the 1980s, when video
began to affect the market, although even then, video sales were probably
brisk in the nontheatrical market as schools and universities made the
switch from 16mm film to VHS. Even today, the film remains hugely
popular: Why Man Creates has been watched on YouTube more than
166,000 times.

332

Civilization
Surprisingly, the title Why Man Creates never appears in the film. Bass
considered it too pretentious and favored the more modest title Notes on
Creativity.78 Bass offered the sponsor no fewer than thirty-eight different
titles, but Kaiser insisted on Why Man Creates. Unable to convince company executives to change their minds, Bass omitted the title altogether,
adding only a generic “Kaiser Aluminum and Chemical Company presents” head title before beginning in medias res.79 In a 1988 seminar for
AT&T executives, Bass minced few words: “It was a title I really felt
uncomfortable with at the time. . . . And almost 20 years later, still do. It
makes a promise that just can’t be kept. . . . And that title served the
film—and Kaiser—badly.”80 In Bass’s opinion, the worst thing about the
title is that it implies there is an answer to the question, whereas Bass’s
whole aesthetic strategy and philosophy are that there are no monocausal
answers, no theoretical precepts. He thought film titles were already too
semantically constricting. As Academy archivist Sean Savage has remarked,
Bass had a real problem with film titles: some had two titles, like Windows/Notes on the Popular Arts, while others had none at all on the physical print. Bass preferred titles with the word “Notes” in them,
communicating something unfinished and open-ended; he didn’t want
any title to carry the semantic or aesthetic weight of defining his film. He
envisioned the film experience as a journey of discovery for the audience,
and he used humor and cinematic form to engage them in a discussion on
the nature of creativity, where there are no final answers, just as there are
no titles.
Bass in fact implements a similar strategy in Notes on the Popular Arts
(his own version of Windows), after removing the corporate good news to
stock traders of the Warner Brothers–Kinney conglomerate.81 In that film,
Bass utilizes a typewriter (with a close-up on disembodied hands) to type
out the film’s title in caps. He also uses notes, each of which is subsequently crossed out with typed double x’s: “When we consider the popular arts today. . . .” Crossed out. “As Emerson wisely said. . . .” Crossed
out. “Popular arts. . . .” Crossed out. The head title’s notes thus succumb
to silence, leaving the film with a title but no beginning, other than a transition to the first episode. Here again, we see Bass’s aversion to theory,
manifested in his inability (comically feigned) to make definitive or generalizing statements about his topic, the so-called popular arts. Unwilling to
define what his overall conception might be, he allows the audience to
enter into the discussion without any preconceptions, allows each viewer

333

SAUL BASS
to create his or her own film from the images and sounds he has created.
Why Man Creates demonstrates the same resistance to articulating ideas in
words but is infinitely more successful, as it is not forced to find humorous
commonalities among all its corporate sponsor’s products.
From the very first image of Why Man Creates, Bass communicates
that his essay film is personal, the musings of the artist. We see Bass’s disembodied hand in extreme close-up (actually, only the fingers) writing
with a pencil on a sheet of white paper: “A series of explorations, episodes
& comments on creativity.”82 As Bass’s colleague Al Kallis noted, staring
at a blank sheet of paper is always the moment of truth for a designer, who
must create something out of nothing and come up with an idea that will
spark communication between the designer and the audience. That image
visualizes the hand of the artist, which must execute and form visual ideas
coming from the brain, from the mind’s eye. Bass returns to the writing
hand throughout the film, marking the various chapters of his work and
presenting the end credits. Here, then, we return to a quintessential Bauhaus image—that of the hand in action, the hand at work creating art.
This is evident in Jan Tschichold’s Bauhaus-influenced photomontage on
the cover of Foto-Auge, juxtaposing the artist’s head (in particular his eye),
the hand holding a compass for drawing, and graph paper.83 One can also
read the use of pencil and paper here as purposefully low tech, indicating
that anyone can create; they are also the first tools of a designer. Finally,
the writing hand is the visual equivalent of a direct address to the audience. Indeed, Why Man Creates eschews the “voice of God” narration of
many other documentary films of the period, which presuppose a passive
audience; instead, Bass attempts to engage viewers in an active process of
questioning and exploration. Significantly, Why Man Creates never directly
answers the central question of its title, freeing each audience member to
take away his or her own thoughts after seeing the film.
The film is broken down into seven sections, or chapters: (1) The
Edifice, (2) Fooling Around: Some Ideas Start that Way, (3) The Process,
(4) The Judgment, (5) A Parable, (6) A Digression, and (7) The Search:
Work in Progress on New Ideas. The first and last sequences are the longest, at five and seven minutes, respectively; the others run about four
minutes, except for “The Judgment” (three minutes) and “A Digression”
(thirty seconds). “The Edifice” and “A Digression” feature animation by
Art Goodman and Pantomime, while “A Parable” employs stop-motion
animation. The other sequences are constructed as live-action montages

334

Civilization
with nonsynchronized and synchronized sound. As in so many Bauhausinfluenced design solutions, whether for a single page or a syntagmatic
ordering of film images, Bass’s film fragments perception through its conglomeration of diverse media. The heterogeneity of its aesthetic media, as
well as its nonlinear narrative, forces the viewer not only to continually
rethink what is being said but also to adjust to how it is being said, promoting an active reading. Each chapter is self-contained, yet it also relates
to those before and after it.
“The Edifice” presents a history of the world through the filter of its
greatest creators and thinkers. This is imagined as a house in which succeeding generations add floors, as the camera slowly tracks up through the
building (and through the ages). At the beginning of this chapter, I mentioned the cave paintings that make up the ground floor of the edifice. Bass
then chronicles humanity’s subsequent technical and intellectual achievements in a humorous fashion: One man invents a lever to lift weights;
another invents the wheel. Further up, masses of slaves move giant stones
for the Egyptian pyramids, while someone on the next floor calls out
“bronze” and “iron,” referring to those respective ages. Next, Euclid is
mentioned by name, while the Greek philosophers are identified by the
questions they asked: “Who shall rule the state?” (Plato). But Bass is not so
naïve as to think that history is only an upward movement characterized by
unadulterated progress. There are always hiccups. For example, when a
toga-wearing figure responds to Plato’s question by saying, “All the people,” he is promptly impaled on a sword by a colleague. The fall of Rome is
visualized by a temple that cracks and then falls (an idea Bass used in Spartacus and would use again in 100 Years of the Telephone). When the Dark Ages
arrive, Bass tints the image blue and has yellow light emanating from Gothic
archways, where we see and hear Gregorian monks chanting:
What is the shape of the Earth?
Flat.
What happens when you get to the edge?
You fall off.
Does the Earth move?
Ne-ev-ev-er.
With the arrival of Copernicus and Galileo (identified by their statements),
the darkness disappears, allowing Michelangelo to paint the ceiling and

335

SAUL BASS
Leonardo da Vinci to paint the floor; the latter is identified by the Mona
Lisa, which he hangs on the wall.
The chronology is not always accurate. For instance, in the film, the
invention of the lightbulb (1879) precedes Darwin (1859), and Freud on
the couch (1899) precedes Alfred Nobel’s invention of dynamite (1863).
Rather than strictly chronologically, Bass groups events by the nature of
the endeavor: Darwin and Freud, Beethoven and Tchaikovsky, Nobel and
Pasteur, Washington, Lincoln, Marx, Wilson, Roosevelt, and so forth.
Bass’s typical humor infuses each level of the edifice. For example, a black
spot bounces through the floor chanting, “I’m a bug, I’m a germ”; then,
when it sees Louis Pasteur, the spot changes its tune, “I’m not a bug, I’m
not a germ.” The closer to the modern era Bass gets, the more negative
the images become. Indeed, the edifice ends as a dystopia: after the Wright
brothers’ biplane lands on top of the building, Bass creates a junkyard pile
of airplanes, automobiles, and television sets, ending the sequence with a
cloud of smoke and an atom symbol hovering over the mountain of metal
as a voice coughs and screams, “Help.” In other words, Bass is saying that
throughout the history of the world, humanity’s creativity has undoubtedly led to progress, as well as to the invention of many things that are
now destroying the planet. This slightly dystopian version of human history certainly runs counter to the sponsor’s feel-good intentions, but it is
couched in humor to soften the blow. It is indeed a moment of real Jewish
self-deprecating humor—always seeing shvartz in the good—that came
naturally to Bass and Goodman but not to the WASP suits at Kaiser.
Chapter 2, “Fooling Around,” presents a series of non sequiturs connected by swish pans: disembodied hands opening a chicken egg and finding crude oil or a butterfly, an analysis of a bald pedestrian’s cranium
visually divided into USDA prime meat cuts, a female and male exchanging the many numbers we must remember in our daily lives (which appear
on the screen until it is completely blackened by numbers), pedestrians
doing jumping jacks on signal at a city crosswalk, a party and its guests.
The humor in this chapter takes its cue from Dadaism, privileging nonsense and intuition; its images tend toward the absurd, the incongruent,
and the playful. Interestingly, the last section, where the heads of three
party guests are opened like jars, originally came at the beginning: the
go-go dancer gets two scoops of ice cream and milk, a somewhat misogynistic visual joke, just for fun; the bearded hippie is revealed to be a mama’s
boy (another Jewish joke); and the straitlaced, middle-class matron is just

336

Civilization
an empty-headed drunk. It is the Dadaist incongruence of the images that
engages the audience, especially children, to think about creativity. As the
chapter ends, the narrator asks, where do ideas come from? The answer:
“From looking at one thing and seeing another, fooling around, playing
with possibilities.” Bass then cuts to a series of multiple exposures: a girl
jumping rope over an extreme low-angle shot of pedestrians or a bird’seye view of New York and the surf flooding a beach. The heterogeneity of
the photomontages defies easy categorization; they constitute “fooling
around,” just as much of the previous film did. And that leads to something worth saving and expanding; “that is where the game stops and the
real work begins.” Bass thus theorizes that all creation is based on experimenting, on trying various tactics, on exploring parameters to find the
middle, on juxtaposing total opposites, whether in ideas or in media. All
this can be fun, but ultimately, it must end in the hard work necessary to
truly engage in the material.
“The Process” presents a young man attempting to create something
out of oversized building blocks, but he fails, and the structure (which
seemingly defies gravity) collapses. Bass then intercuts on the sound track
an original interview with Thomas Edison, talking about failing repeatedly before he succeeded, while photographic portraits of Edison at various ages flash onscreen. The young man tries again, but again his structure
collapses, and Ernest Hemingway appears in portraits and talks about
“fighting like hell” when he tries to write. While the on-camera talent
inadvertently punches his hand through a building block, Bass cuts to
portraits of Albert Einstein, who notes that a solution cannot be achieved
by brute force, but with patience, it might eventually present itself. Suddenly the young man has an epiphany: he attaches body parts (hands,
arms, legs) from a clothing store mannequin to his building blocks to create a moving sculpture. The artist’s shrill wife then enters the scene to
comment that his creation needs American flags, Bass again injecting
humor into these mostly serious proceedings. Bass implies, through this
little bit of theater, that the creative process involves continual experimentation and hard work, yet the final outcome may be dependent on serendipity, chance, luck. The intercutting of Edison, Hemingway, and Einstein
undergirds the notion that hard work is an essential element of the creative process.84
In “The Judgment,” Bass takes aim at society’s critics, whom he sees
as more or less useless in “contributing to the creative process.” He

337

SAUL BASS
accomplishes this by editing together almost exclusively negative comments made by ordinary people looking at an invisible work of art.
Indeed, the first words heard are, “What a piece of garbage that is!” In
fact, Bass is restaging well-known television footage of Chicagoans
being interviewed after the unveiling of a Picasso sculpture in front of
the Richard Daley Civic Center on 15 August 1967. At the time, the
publicly financed sculpture in downtown Chicago caused a huge controversy.85 In the film, one gentleman says the artwork represents the
decline of the West, obviously referring to Oswald Spengler, and the
crowd turns into an ugly mob, apparently ready to lynch the artist; one
person actually says, “Let’s hang ’em.” Bass cuts to the young man from
the previous chapter, now dressed as a cowboy, who takes aim at the
audience and shoots, “killing” two on-the-street critics. In turn, he is
shot with words of damnation, momentarily reviving when an offscreen
housewife notes that she likes the piece. Bass’s closing joke, though, is
that she likes the artwork because the material used is worth “at least
$100.” Here, Bass is not only poking fun at the uselessness of critics
(perhaps including his own critics in the Kaiser executive suites); he is
also warning the artist that listening to the mob is dangerous. More
important, as Bass repeatedly stated in interviews, creativity is an act of
nonconformity, of moving beyond conventional wisdom. Society is
often an impediment to change and to creativity (a thought taken up
again in “A Digression”).
“A Parable” illustrates the notion of nonconformity by following the
“career” of a Ping Pong ball that is rejected in the production line when
it bounces too high in a test. It bounces out into the world—Bass apparently voiced the ball’s bounce, “POING”—eventually ending up in a
large field where other rejects have gathered. But instead of sitting around
and giving in to its fate, it bounces higher and higher until it disappears.
Bass then ends with a somewhat bombastic, tongue-in-cheek roll title in
dead silence:
There are some who say he’s coming back and we have only to
wait. . . .
There are some who say he burst up there because ball was not
meant to fly. . . .
And there are some who maintain he landed safely in a place where
balls bounce high.

338

Civilization
The roll title and the silence—fixtures in the science fiction and adventure
genres—imbue the sequence with an epic, even mythological, quality,
thereby humorously spoofing film genres while visualizing the life and
times of a Ping Pong ball that may have become the messiah.
Surprisingly, Bass spends a significant amount of screen time on the
factory production process, cutting together shots of moving balls and
machines on an assembly line, an homage to Walter Ruttmann’s montages in Berlin, Symphony of a City, but also emphasizing standardization.
Here, Bass is once again stressing by example the necessary element of
nonconformity and the need for artists to take risks, regardless of social
concerns. The parable of Ping is the story of an artist or an explorer who
dares to enter unchartered waters and becomes the stuff of legend.
The relationship between society and the individual artist is also the
subject of the next chapter, “A Digression.” In this thirty-second animated sequence, two snails meet. One asks, “Have you ever thought that
radical ideas threaten institutions, then become institutions and in turn
reject radical ideas which threaten institutions?” When the second snail
responds in the negative, the first one says, “Gee, for a moment there I
thought I had something.” In fact, this notion of the cyclical nature of
radical ideas is a truism for art and politics. What is radical and new in one
generation may become conservative or reactionary in the next. As the
literary and social critic Irving Howe, a contemporary of Bass, wrote: “In
the war between modernist culture and bourgeois society . . . the middle
class has discovered that the fiercest attacks upon its values can be transposed into pleasing entertainments, and the avant-garde writer or artist
must confront the one challenge for which he has not been prepared: the
challenge of success. Contemporary society is endlessly assimilative, even
if it tames and vulgarizes what it has learned, sometimes foolishly to
praise.”86 By the late 1960s, Bass could say much the same about his own
work in film titles. That which had appeared revolutionary and new in the
mid-1950s had become acceptable industry practice.
The final chapter, “The Search,” is not only the longest but also the
most complicated and heterogeneous. In fact, it consisted of two distinct
chapters in earlier edits. First, Bass interviews scientists working on longterm projects; then he creates a montage of art that mirrors the intellectual history of “The Edifice.” As the chapter begins, an offscreen speaker
is interviewing a cancer specialist, who explains what he is doing and concludes that in five years he will know more. Some of the footage seems to

339

SAUL BASS
be taken from Bass’s IBM cancer research spot. The offscreen speaker
notes that Dr. Dulbecco has been working on cancer research for twenty
years.87 And this is the point of all the subsequent interviews with scientists: they are working on long-term problems, and there is no instant
gratification—just decades of hard work. One scientist admits he has
reached a dead end after seven years of research and is at a loss what to do
next. Bass films the scientist packing up his briefcase and turning off the
hall lights, plunging the screen into darkness. Again, Bass is emphasizing
that some problems are difficult, and finding solutions may take decades
or longer. Having once again fallen into a depressing (albeit realistic) state
of mind, as he had at the end of “The Edifice,” Bass tries to invoke some
positive energy by asking, “Why does man create?”
Bass then cuts to a yellow sun slowly rising on an orange horizon, as
a stick figure that could be a Giacometti sculpture fades in. This image
inaugurates the chapter’s final section: a montage of the history of art.
The image itself (which is also used for the poster) is hauntingly beautiful,
mixing nature with modernist art in a way that emphasizes the mystical
aspects of creation rather than modernism’s clear-eyed rationalism or the
nonsense of Dada. It is an image that only the mature Bass could have created, remaining true to the modernist notions of Moholy-Nagy and Kepes
in terms of its design elements, but now melded through an image of the
sun to a more nature-oriented aesthetic, bound up with his California
home.
Bass structures this journey through art with a series of statements by
the narrator, which are then illustrated with paintings or cutouts of paintings. As the narrator intones, “Men have struggled against time, against
decay,” Bass interweaves multiple-exposure images of ancient art (with a
Picasso thrown in), depicting the gods (in man’s image) with lightning,
water, fire, and earth. He is thus interpreting the will to create art as a
struggle against the natural environment. This is a riff on a similar creation
sequence in The Searching Eye, but now centered on humanity’s rather
than nature’s creation. Bass then implies that man’s technological advancement defies nature, even while providing benefits to humanity. This point
is emphasized as Bass fades to black on a spaceship, then cuts to his signature image of birds flying away from the sun at center screen—the designer’s personal trope for human freedom. Next, Bass cuts together ancient
and modern paintings of men and women rather than gods, including a
Peter Paul Rubens (Dance of Italian Villagers, 1636), a Pieter Brueghel

340

Civilization
(Wheat Harvest, 1565), and a Pablo Picasso (Maternity, 1905), all of
which focus on human secular subjects. Curiously, Bass’s cropping of
well-known paintings indicates that he is not necessarily interested in
maintaining the integrity of the art, as an art historian would be; rather,
he treats the visual material as a designer who is willing to use any visual
resource. Indeed, the cropping is severe enough to dehistoricize the paintings, lifting their subjects into the timeless realm of myth. Oddly, Michelangelo’s finger of God from the Sistine Chapel is seen behind a cross
matte, a Christian interpretation of the theology behind the image. This
seems out of character for Bass, who seldom (if ever) employed religious
symbolism in his work and whose public Jewishness remained secular.
One wonders whether the cross was simply a nod to all the medieval and
Renaissance art inspired and financed by the Catholic Church, or perhaps
to the conservative WASPs at Kaiser. When Bass cuts to signatures of
Rembrandt, Picasso, Mark Twain, and others, they become metonymies
for the great art, literature, and music created by these individuals.
Interestingly, Bass’s next montage is of street graffiti, some of which
was shot for West Side Story, as the sound track notes, “Some have spoken
inarticulately.” Bass ends the sequence with two words painted on a brick
wall, “I am,” indicating that even graffiti is a legitimate form of human
communication and a means of self-expression, no matter how raw. By
extension, Bass exclaims that art can be created by anyone, regardless of
their training, education, or status.88 In his final image, Bass slowly zooms
out from the head of a male statue, then dissolves to a shot of a boy on the
beach chasing seagulls, taken from The Searching Eye.
Bass thus ends the film not only with an image of freedom but also
with the profound statement that to create is to communicate, and to
communicate is the essence of humanness. Human beings, unlike any
other creatures on earth, have the ability to speak articulately and to assert
their individuality through language. And there is no better medium for
asserting one’s uniqueness than art. But Bass also understands that creating anything new is a complicated process involving imagination, thinking
outside the box, and continual experimentation, as well as hard work and
the ability to block out the noise of the mob. In one image, missing from
the final cut, a number of visitors look at a piece of modern art in a
museum, with one man in a suit standing on his head to view the painting.
It is a joke on modern, nonrepresentational art but also a theoretical statement about the fact that art, once it is created, belongs to the audience,

341

SAUL BASS
which may choose to read the work in any number of ways. In Why Man
Creates Saul Bass is both funny and deadly serious, because his subject
calls for it. Creating something original demands a playful attitude, on the
one hand, and lots of serious hard work, on the other. Not without reason, he cut at least three important sequences from the film into his 1969
AT&T identity campaign film, which was intended to sell the new company design and colors to middle managers; these scenes called attention
to themselves and intellectually engaged the audience, which was necessary to get a buy-in from AT&T’s staff.89
Through his collage technique, Bass communicates theses and seemingly random thoughts, often articulating them nonverbally through the
juxtaposition of images, whether of his own creation or borrowed from
the great masters. The collage technique also allows an open-ended structure, giving audience members great freedom to create their own film
from Bass’s shards, elevating communication from a sender-receiver situation to a reciprocal, two-way dialogue. In doing so, Bass acknowledges
that we are all products of what has come before, but we also have the
freedom to be ourselves and do nothing more than chase birds on the
beach. In Phase IV, Bass’s only feature film, the designer further explores
the social aspects of human communication. That film focuses not on
individual identity formation but on social microcosms, concluding that
the survival of the planet may be in jeopardy if humans don’t relinquish
their self-centered individual desires.

Phase IV
Ironically, Saul Bass’s poster for Why Man Creates can be read as a science fiction image, the spindly Giacometti figure in the foreground
matching some popular images of aliens—human-like without being
human—indistinct in the glare of the rising yellow sun. Bass’s only fulllength feature film would in fact be a science fiction film about ants taking over the world. Made in the wake of The Hellstrom Chronicle (1971),
Night of the Lepus (1972), Invasion of the Bee Girls (1973), and other
films about nature gone wild, Phase IV was marketed in much the same
way: as a horror film. More appropriately, given its lack of any sustained
action sequences and its high-art design, it should have been categorized with Stanley Kubrick’s 2001: A Space Odyssey (1968), a film it
resembles in more ways than one, or with George Lucas’s THX 1138

342

Civilization
(1971) or Fantastic Planet (1973) or Nicholas Roeg’s The Man Who
Fell to Earth (1976). As a result of Paramount’s mishandling of the film,
Phase IV was a failure at the box office, although eventually, it almost
broke even.90 Today, the film is considered a typical film maudit, or
“cursed film”—one that was unjustly ignored or undervalued at the
time of its release but has now been rehabilitated. And while the designer’s uncertainty in directing actors and sustaining dialogue is apparent,
the film’s graphically stunning images and open-ended narrative more
than compensate the audience. Phase IV’s overall design therefore
deserves a reevaluation, especially in light of the recently rediscovered
original ending, which Paramount had rejected in favor of a shorter but
no less ambiguous finale.
The idea for Phase IV was apparently hatched over cocktails in 1971.
Peter Bart, then vice president in charge of production at Paramount, was
having dinner with producer Paul Radin. When Bart asked Radin what
was cooking, the latter responded off the top of his head, even though
nothing was actually in the works: an ant story. Paramount green-lit the
idea almost immediately. Radin called Bass, who happened to have a
friend who worked with ants, and he liked the idea.91 In September 1971
a press release went out announcing the film with Bass as director and
Mayo Simon as scriptwriter. Bass’s fee for directing was $30,000; however, all but $5,000 would be withheld until the film was completed on
budget.92 This may have been a precaution because Bass had never
directed a feature film, although he had put his name in the hamper for A
Man Called Horse (1970), and Ingo Preminger had suggested him at Fox
for M*A*S*H (1970).93 By June 1972, the script was apparently finished,
and preproduction was proceeding, with shooting scheduled to take place
in California and the Arizona desert.94 However, within weeks, the Hollywood Reporter announced that the film would be produced in London,
with location shooting in Kenya, possibly because Radin’s production
company for his TV series Born Free was located there.95 Bass storyboarded and numbered virtually every shot in the film, even going so far
as to block out the actors’ movements within the shot.96 Production
began on 30 October 1972 at London’s Pinewood Studios, with an
approved budget of $1 million; it continued through February 1973, and
postproduction dragged on in London until November 1973.97 The film
was given a PG rating by the MPAA, after a hearing in January 1974
reversed the original R rating.98

343

SAUL BASS
Paramount apparently couldn’t decide what to do with the film. As
early as September 1973, while the film was still in postproduction, Bass
and Radin were sounding the alarm bell, complaining about Paramount’s
lack of communication and foot-dragging in terms of devising a release
campaign, despite “the tremendous enthusiasm on the part of Paramount’s executives and staff towards the picture.”99 For nine months the
film sat on the shelf as Bass pleaded with Robert Evans and Frank Yablans
to release it, but Paramount was skittish because previews had garnered
mixed results.100 For example, a New York City preview in August 1974
netted the following comments: “Poor. Walk-out. General appreciation of
Saul Bass’ artistry, but no involvement with plot or theme of film. Most
women do not like the film, in contrast to men who liked and approved
of it.”101 Meanwhile, Bass and Paramount were reediting the film. Bass
complained that Paramount’s publicity was selling Phase IV as a straight
horror film, attracting audiences that would be disappointed with a film
that did not really belong in that genre. Ultimately, Paramount had so
little confidence in the film that it opened in Los Angeles without any
press screening or fanfare on the bottom of a double bill.102
Ironically, the film poster was not designed by Bass, and it was certainly not modern. It features an old-style, realistic hand in close-up with
ants climbing out of a hole in the palm.103 At a London preview attended
by friends of Bass, several audience members wondered whether the film
was European in origin, and Bass certainly believed the film would have
had a better chance if it had been sold that way.104 It is unclear whether
the film at that point included Bass’s original ending, which, like Kubrick’s
2001, consisted of a montage of the future of the planet under the guidance of a new ant-directed intelligence. By the time of the film’s American
release, the ending had been drastically cut to just a few short shots.105
As noted earlier, the reviews for Saul Bass’s first feature film were
decidedly mixed. On the positive side, the exhibitors’ trade journal Box
Office predicted substantial earnings for the film, concluding: “So amazing are the images on the screen and the picture’s total effect that one is
shocked afterward to realize how few special effects there are.”106 In fact,
numerous reviewers commented on the startling ant footage and the
beauty of Bass’s compositions, but they also complained that the film’s
narrative was unrealistic if not silly.107 Jay Cocks at Time magazine also
praised the film: “Phase IV is good, eerie entertainment, with interludes of
such haunted visual intensity that it becomes, at its best, a nightmare

344

Civilization
incarnate. It can also be quite wobbly, with ripely absurd dialogue.”108
Bass’s handling of the actors and the dialogue were seen by many critics
as fatal weaknesses, leading Variety to call the film mediocre horror and to
go for the designer’s jugular: “On the basis of the evidence here, he is not
going to be as trail-blazing as a director.”109 However, Kevin Thomas in
the Los Angeles Times lambasted Paramount for its mishandling of the
film, which he declared to be visually stunning: “All this is made gaspingly
credible under Bass’ inspired direction, abetted by K. Middleham’s
remarkable photography. . . . Never do Bass and his gifted associates ever
go for cheap horror effects . . . it emerges as a stunningly effective warning
than man must learn to live in harmony with nature—if it’s not already
too late.”110
Likewise, a number of English critics realized that the film was more
akin to art than horror. As Nigel Andrews wrote in London’s Financial
Times: “But Bass’ film is something else altogether: a surreal poem in
which the landscapes seem to have sprung from a Dali painting—hard
shapes and contours drooping in the yellow desert heat—and in which
the visual effects . . . represent cinematic sleight-of-hand of the first
order.”111 In the almost forty years since the film’s original release, and
especially since its appearance on DVD, such critical points of view have
prevailed, and the film is now considered a cult classic.112 As one critic
noted in 2010: “Phase IV is much more than the sum of its parts and worthy of (re)visiting now that it has found second life on DVD.”113
Phase IV’s plot is deceptively simple: Cosmic phenomena cause a
change in the behavior of ants in the Arizona desert. Making a giant evolutionary leap, the ants begin to communicate and behave tactically, taking over whole communities and killing all human and animal life in their
path. Biologist Ernest Hubbs (Nigel Davenport) and mathematician and
game theorist James Lesko (Michael Murphy) are sent to the desert to
study the ants and take appropriate measures to end the threat. There,
they set up a hermetically sealed laboratory. When they are attacked by the
ants, they spray a yellow poison that inadvertently kills a farm family
attempting to flee to the lab. However, a young girl, Kendra (Lynne Frederick), survives, and the scientists take her in. The ants then miraculously
develop into a new species that is impervious to the poison. Hubbs
becomes increasingly irrational after being bitten by an ant; he refuses to
retreat and is killed by the insects. Lesko, meanwhile, has learned to communicate with the ants via electric radio signals and is eventually accepted

345

SAUL BASS
by them, as is Kendra. The couple is designated to be the progenitors of
a new human-ant hybrid that will take over the planet.
Phase IV conforms to Hollywood’s generic expectations, insofar as its
plot centers on a beleaguered group of white men surrounded by
“aliens”— whether Indians, as in westerns like The Indian Fighter (1956);
creatures from outer space, as in science fiction films like Aliens (1986); or
hostile gang members, as in crime dramas like Fort Apache, the Bronx
(1981). And although classic sci-fi film fans and critics tend to favor realistic narratives, the charm of many such films is in their art direction, cinematography, special effects, and visual design. It is no accident that some
of the most interesting science fiction films have been directed by art
directors such as William Cameron Menzies (Things to Come, 1936) and
Nathan Juran (The Preying Mantis, 1957), animators such as George Pal
(War of the Worlds, 1953), special-effects wizards such as Ray Harryhausen (First Men on the Moon, 1964) and Douglass Trumbull (Silent Running, 1971), or cinematographers such as Rudolph Maté (When Worlds
Collide, 1951). These artists, who were schooled visually and understood
how to compose an image, often gravitated to science fiction because it
offers possibilities to create alternative worlds rather than dress up the
contemporary landscape. Bass, in this regard, seemed like a natural choice
for the film, even though he felt challenged by the visual design problems
posed by a science fiction film.114 And visual acuity is indeed a requirement
for the genre, according to Vivian Sobchack: “The major visual impulse of
all SF films is to pictorialize the unfamiliar, the non-existent, the strange
and the totally alien—and to do so with a verisimilitude which is, at times,
documentary in flavor and style.”115 A preferred landscape for science fiction, then, is the desert, because its barren harshness emphasizes man’s
vulnerability and exposure, in contrast to the aliens that inhabit it.116
The film is narrated by Lesko (the preview version had no narration,
but audiences were apparently confused). He first describes the changes in
the ants’ behavior as Bass cuts from images of the universe to individual
ants running through tunnels and then gathering in larger groups. At this
point, the music gives way to the deafening sound of the ants’ highpitched squeal. As the ant footage continues, we hear warnings of a biological imbalance, because traditionally antagonistic ant species are now
working together to eliminate all their predators. It is seven minutes into
the film before any human life is shown, consisting of a vehicle being
driven through a depopulated landscape. Thus, from the very beginning,

346

Civilization
Bass is juxtaposing the natural world of ants with their extraordinary
power to communicate. For Bass, communication is the first sign of intelligence, separating human from animal (suggested by the opening animation of Why Man Creates). As subjective ant shots indicate, Bass assigns
these creatures the ability to see and gain knowledge before acting, just as
he did with human subjects in The Searching Eye and From Here to There.
At one point, after the ants have short-circuited the scientists’ air conditioner, Lesko asks, “How do they know?” The viewer already knows that
the ants can see. As the narrative continues, Lesko begins to send radio
signals of a square, arguing that geometry is a universal language of intelligent beings. As Bass notes, the ants communicate through structures—
that is, architecture becomes a language.117 Unlike in other horror films,
where the threat from aliens is violently mindless, Phase IV’s ants are
rational.
Utilizing high-key lighting to backlight the colorfully translucent ant
bodies, Ken Middleham’s microscopic photography is fascinating and
beautiful. The play of light on the ants’ bodies provides a veritable light
show—extreme colors from red to blue to green, huge eyes reflecting
blue light, the camera zooming in until the eye is an intricate mass of light
blue dots in three dimensions. Here, Bass and Middleman are carrying on
a long tradition of nature films that were championed by the avant-garde
because they aestheticized nature, such as the films of Jan Mol and Jean
Painlevé in the 1920s. The seemingly vast networks of tunnels are used
not only for transportation but also as communications highways. The
insects’ actions are strangely affecting, such as the sequence in which a
whole string of ants sacrifice themselves to carry a ball of poison to the
queen, who consumes the yellow chemical to immunize her offspring. In
another scene, accompanied by funeral music, the ants line up corpses of
their fallen comrades.
In many ways, the ants seem more sympathetic than the humans, who
are depicted as weak, insensitive, and duplicitous. Hubbs shows virtually
no emotion when he realizes that they have killed the farm family, and he
hinders rescue efforts for selfish motives. In fact, Lesko and Hubbs represent the two poles of scientific discourse: while Lesko hopes to understand
the ants and thus work in harmony with nature, Hubbs is only interested
in trying to overpower and control nature. Clearly, from Bass’s mid-1970s
ecological perspective (further developed in The Solar Film) the former
strategy is preferable. An early draft of the film’s conclusion included the

347

SAUL BASS
title “Man at One with Nature (Paradise Regained),” which was supposed
to follow a highly metaphoric sequence in which Kendra gives birth to a
sun, after she and Lesko have made love in an ant tunnel.118 Bass’s use of
visual metaphors of nature finds its correlative in the way he measures
time: not in hours but in sunrises and sunsets, in moonrises and moonsets.
The orbs of the sun and the moon are a recurring visual leitmotif, mirrored graphically in the entrance to the ant queendom and its tunnels, the
laboratory, the holes in the hands of the human victims, the eyes of the
ants, and the circle of light out of which Kendra rises as if from the dead,
a symbol of life.
Phase IV is indeed a feast for the eyes. The film constantly surprises
the viewer with striking images of the brightly colored phantasmagoria of
Middleham’s ant colony, as well as images of the desert. In an opening
shot, Bass utilizes an extremely long lens, held for more than a minute, to
present an image of the yellow desert heat and haze that resembles nothing if not an Abstract Expressionist painting. Fast-motion images of the
desert landscape follow, its ever-changing light from rising suns and full
moons reflecting a constantly shifting field of visual details. Finally, there
are images that simply arrest the mind: the slow zoom on a blue star cluster; the fast-motion wilting of a blue cactus flower; the blue-tinted oscilloscope image of ant sounds (Lissajous spirals from Vertigo); the black ant
obelisks against a blue sky,119 their heads tilting up toward the heavens like
some kind of primitive gods; the blue honeycomb of the ant queen’s eye;
the poisoned yellow desert landscape;120 the shattering of glass beakers
and obelisks in slow motion; the stop-motion decomposition of a desert
mouse on a television screen; the multiple exposures of Lesko’s final trek
to the ant queen; the step-and-repeat opticals of humans mating. These
images offer a veritable catalog of experimental film techniques. Many of
Bass’s images, such as the abandoned desert towns with street grids for
developments that were never constructed or the poisoned yellow landscape, can be read as contemporary news images of ecological disasters.
And, given Bass’s interest in ecological issues, such references are probably intentional.
Nevertheless, there is an interesting paradox in the film’s overall view.
The unseen human institutions of power are shown to be shortsighted
and unable to comprehend the seriousness of the problem. Hubbs, a representative of the scientific establishment supported by the institutions of
power, is self-serving and is willing to risk lives to achieve his own ends. In

348

Civilization
other words, it is dangerous to rely solely on these larger social structures.
But therein lies the paradox, because the film’s nonconformist and antiauthoritarian messages are relativized by what follows. Both Kendra and
Lesko “sacrifice” themselves for the common good, which is precisely
why the ants allow them to survive. They are thus seen as pure of heart.
Bass may be implying that our own society is too invested in individual
bourgeois privileges and that de-emphasizing individuality for the sake of
species survival would lead to better communication and a more smoothly
functioning society. In an interview while the film was still in production,
Bass stated: “When we started the script we agreed that ants were more
adaptable than man, they had more discipline and social will. All they
really lacked was individual will and technology. So we gave them those
two things. And Jesus! What we wound up with was a question of who
has domination over the planet!”121
At the end of the release version of Phase IV, the chosen couple submits to the will of the new ant intelligence, which is nothing if not authoritarian. One can imagine that science fiction audiences in 1974 would
have found it hard to swallow that the humans essentially lose out to the
monsters. Forty years later, such a downbeat ending is much more acceptable. Louis Dorfsman sent Bass a razor-sharp ideological analysis of the
film: “Actually the message as I chose to interpret it is that a disciplined,
structured society will eventually beat the shit out of our so-called free
society. No?”122 Before deciding whether this is the case, it might be productive to analyze Bass’s original six-minute conclusion to the film, which
survives in verbal descriptions, storyboards, and actual footage. The
release ending is identical to the first twenty-one shots of the original ending, but the final shot of Kendra and Lesko standing and waiting for
instructions is shot 96 in Bass’s original cut. What comes in between is a
much more dire visualization of humanity’s fate under the ant dictatorship, even as the montage of images remains mysterious, bringing the film
back to its original antiauthoritarian and nonconformist impulses.
Some have compared Saul Bass’s original ending to Stanley Kubrick’s
finale for 2001: A Space Odyssey.123 But Bass is putting on much more than
a light show for hippies tripping on acid. In ninety-eight shots over 5:50
minutes, Bass creates a vision of humanity reduced to specimens in a giant
breeding farm controlled by ants. Initially, Bass accomplishes this by cutting together twelve images of Kendra and Lesko walking and running
through huge, open architectural spaces that have the feel of de Chirico

349

SAUL BASS
paintings but the look of Oscar Niemeyer’s reinforced-concrete Brasilia:
large, modernist hexagonal structures with flat plazas as roofs; square, layered buildings with endless ramps. As in the ants’ message to the scientists, the ants here use architecture, structure, and form as language. The
landscape turns sinister when it is revealed that some buildings are divided
into open cells that contain humans, with the ants watching over them.
Bass’s camera zooms in on the cells from above, so that the buildings
resemble boxes with square compartments to hold buttons or butterfly
specimens. Another shot reveals endless rows of open windows with
human silhouettes in them. Bass seems to be implying that modernist
architecture has a dehumanizing aspect, because the dimensions of space
dwarf humans and make the environment inhospitable. In a number of
images, Lesko and Kendra are seen as tiny specks fleeing but never getting
anywhere.
In another series of fifteen flash cuts, Bass edits together close-ups of
individual humans with “QUAD 37/47741” and other numbers tattooed on them, indicating locations. One shot of Bass himself in rubber
and metal sunglasses directly quotes Chris Marker’s totalitarian scientists
in La Jetée (1962). Human beings in this brave new world are visualized
as laboratory specimens subject to numerous experiments: fingers boring
a hole in a man’s forehead, fingertips on fire, and so on. Finally, Bass metaphorically visualizes the human mating process by opening with a composite image, half of Kendra’s face and half of Lesko’s face, followed by
multiple exposures of a nude Kendra giving birth to a circular symbol of
life. Then he cuts to naked bodies in the surf; tadpoles swimming in blue
water, symbolizing sperm; and a blue rose opening in stop motion, symbolizing female genitalia. Next, Bass cuts in a multiple exposure of a man
diving and an eagle flying. (This image from The Searching Eye is reutilized in Quest, where it symbolizes freedom. But here it has ominous
undercurrents of danger, as it does in Cape Fear.) The futility of flight is
ultimately revealed when Bass concludes the sequence with the couple
standing and holding hands while the ants watch over them, the same
image of submission that concludes the release ending. Thus, Bass creates
a dystopian view of the future, envisioning a society in which individual
desire is subsumed by the interests of the social organism as a whole, here
represented by the ants. In an interesting paradox, the ants communicate
through form and structure, just as Bass does in his designs in general and
in the original ending of the film in particular. Accompanied only by

350

Civilization
music, the original ending of Phase IV thus conveys its knowledge purely
visually, allowing each viewer to interpret the quick flow of images
individually.
After the original ending was reconstituted, Bass, with the benefit of
hindsight, admitted that he understood why it had been shortened. He
acknowledged that it was too long and too abstract, and no one would
have understood what it all meant.124 Indeed, Bass himself was never able
to explain what it signified. As in the case of Phase IV’s original ending,
much of Bass’s film work was driven by graphic design, by formal considerations, rather than by the semantics of editing. In the aftermath of Phase
IV and the many changes he was forced to make, Bass gave up on producing Hollywood feature films. He thought it was just too difficult to work
with unions and producers. He told a British journalist that directing a
feature film is “like attaching a pencil to the scoop of a bulldozer and then
trying to draw a sensitive portrait with it. You’re in the driver’s seat, but
the controls are imprecise. You’ve got a million people on the set, alarms
are going off and the till is jangling. It’s a matter of survival to complete
it.”125
Now, more than forty years after its initial release, Saul Bass’s Phase IV
is considered a much more interesting film than many critics at the time
realized. Within the context of the science fiction genre, Bass not only
warns against our continued destruction of the planet and our disharmony with nature but also theorizes that the essence of humanity is the
ability to communicate intelligently—a skill that must be utilized much
more often for the common social good. Finally, in using a whole catalog
of innovative cinematic devices, Bass has crafted a film that aspires to high
art rather than satisfying the lowly standards of genre, thus elevating the
medium, as he had done for titles and commercials and in his short films.
When contemplating Saul Bass’s fifty-eight-year design career, it becomes
apparent what an extraordinary achievement it was. Of all the modernist
graphic designers in post–World War II America, Bass was the only one to
negotiate two more or less separate careers: his corporate design business,
and his involvement in all that was cinema, whether trade advertisements,
posters, titles, commercials, or films. No other nationally known graphic
designer straddled the two industries: Ray and Charles Eames stuck to
avant-garde films, and Paul Rand and Erik Nitsche were part-timers when
it came to Hollywood poster designs. For Bass, the corporate side of his

351

SAUL BASS
business was often used to finance the cinema side, especially toward the
end of his career, when his film projects lost money due to undercapitalization. Cinema and filmmaking were, by all accounts, Bass’s passion.
Indeed, Bass perfectly embodies the kind of work described so eloquently
by David James in The Most Typical Avant-Garde, documenting careers
that crossed the borders between Hollywood and the avant-garde.126
Whereas artists such as Oscar Fischinger, Pat O’Neill, and Morgan Fischer
worked in the industry to finance their art, Bass consistently undermined
Hollywood’s standard operating procedures by insisting on high-art standards for his designs. In the former cases, Hollywood indirectly subsidized avant-garde art film production, but in the latter, avant-garde
technique and aesthetics were integrated into Hollywood’s commercial
work flow. Bass didn’t always get his way, as demonstrated by his catalog
of rejects and the existence of his own gallery versions of previously published work, but he got his way more often than anyone else did. A brand
was born.
Saul Bass was the right person at the right time, and he knew how to
seize the opportunity presented to him by American cultural history.
Essentially an autodidact, Bass used willpower, determination, and his
vociferous reading of design texts and images (in particular, the design
books by Laszlo Moholy-Nagy and Gyorgy Kepes) to climb out of his
ethnic (Jewish) and professional (cut and paste) ghetto and enter the rapidly professionalizing field of graphic design, previously the exclusive
domain of white, Anglo-Saxon Protestants. Growing up poor in the
Bronx, with only limited educational opportunities beyond high school,
Bass endured a ten-year apprenticeship in East Coast sweatshops before
heading west for Hollywood, where he would reach the top of his profession and achieve international fame and recognition. Bass’s trajectory
resembled that of the Hollywood moguls, who founded an industry and
rose to the top of the social hierarchy.
The world was changing in the aftermath of World War II. Thanks to
the influx of mostly European, modernist, Jewish refugee artists and
designers both before and after the war, the level of sophistication of
American design was forever altered for the better. Suddenly, modernist
design was being supported by major capitalist institutions, in no small
part due to the influence of Bauhaus émigrés who elevated design to the
level of art but also insisted on practical solutions that would be good
business. The Bauhaus aesthetic of clean and simple lines, circles, and

352

Civilization
squares was easily adapted to the needs of American corporate advertising,
projecting an image of capitalism that was modern and forward thinking.
This created new opportunities for an ambitious young designer, and Bass
struck out on his own, moving to California when it was essentially virgin
territory for modernist graphic designers. Bass carved out a lifelong career
by draping himself in that European modernist mantle, but with a romantic American touch, and then selling that aesthetic to the Hollywood
entertainment industry as a form of moral uplift. Bass was able to accomplish this feat because he started at the bottom in the film industry and
had a deep understanding of its psychology.
Another historical transition working in Bass’s favor was the slow but
continual breakdown of the classical Hollywood studio system, whereby
all aspects of production, distribution, and exhibition were controlled by
a vertically and horizontally organized corporation. With the outlawing of
block booking, young, independent producer-directors sought product
differentiation in the newly competitive film market by raising their nongeneric aesthetic standards. With his own newly acquired high-art credentials as a modernist graphic designer documented in feature stories in
European design magazines, Bass appealed to this new generation of
independent producers and directors. Despite the intransience of the film
industry power structures, Bass managed to create a unique and historically significant body of work across multiple media. That work was of its
time yet also outside of it, made for commercial imperatives but imbued
with the integrity of the artist. Despite the Taylorized production system,
which often discouraged aesthetic ambitions or artistic signatures, Bass’s
film work is instantly recognizable and capable of inducing intense visual
pleasure. Using avant-garde techniques, Bass integrated popular and high
art, elevating the former through the latter. With rare exceptions, Bass
worked only on projects that were true to his liberal American politics and
social ideology. No designer did that longer or more effectively than Saul
Bass. That is his legacy.
The key to Bass’s success is that he developed an instantly recognizable brand, one that created specific expectations in his clients but still
managed to give them something unique. It was a lesson he learned from
his Hollywood apprenticeship: audiences want the same thing over and
over again, yet somehow different and surprising. Bass’s brand relied on
Bauhaus principles, which the designer had internalized to such a degree
that they became like intuition: relying on a modernist grid, composing

353

SAUL BASS
images from simple geometric shapes, devising logo-like icons for product
identity, and developing his montage skills. These formal devices allowed
Bass to communicate efficiently, while still giving audiences the freedom
to read images subjectively. Over time, Bass began to integrate images of
nature and the natural environment into his modernist designs, moving
beyond the cold rationalism of European modernist design to a more
romantically inflected aesthetic featuring sunsets and rainbows. A question for future research may be to what extent other modernist American
designers translated modernism into a specifically American form. In any
case, Bass’s best graphic designs for cinema directly reference modernist
art: his posters for Man with the Gold Arm, Bonjour Tristesse, Saint Joan,
and Anatomy of a Murder. His films and titles, in contrast, utilize avantgarde compositions and cinematic techniques, as well as montage, to construct open-ended narratives that privilege audience subjectivity. In his
best cinematic work, Why Man Creates, Bass constructs a free-form essay
film that depends on conscious audience participation to convey its multidimensional levels of meaning, making it truly a work of the modernist
avant-garde. As a result, Bass’s work remains as fresh today as when it first
emerged from his studio.
Saul Bass embraced the Bauhaus aesthetic and ethic, focusing his
most serious attention on the layout and composition of the image, yet
also considering graphic design, typography, animation, stop motion, split
screen, and all the other camera and laboratory technologies that call
attention to the painterly construction of the frame. The two-dimensional
frame became the canvas on which Bass telegraphed key words and images
that communicated as efficiently as today’s search engines. Many of his
logos and images have entered into our collective cultural memory,
whether Vertigo’s Lissajous spiral form, the “corpse” from Anatomy of a
Murder, or the disembodied arms from Exodus and Spartacus. Young
designers continually employ the “Bass look” to differentiate their work
stylistically. References to specific Bass images also abound; for example, a
2014 commercial for Nikon cameras shows a young boy building a New
York skyline from wooden building blocks, the image of the finished
sculpture with the creator in the background replicating Bass’s opening
credits for Alcoa Premiere or, more specifically, a still of Bass and his set
published in Bass and Kirkham’s coffee-table book.
According to Lev Manovich, digital cinema has been transformed
from a nineteenth-century pre-cinema art of hand-painted images to a

354

Civilization
twentieth-century realist art of indexical images to a twenty-first-century
art of computer animation.127 Thus, it becomes evident that understanding graphic art and painting is essential for both producing and reading
images in the digital world. Maybe this is the ultimate key to Saul Bass’s
success and the element that made (and makes) him modern: in constructing a brand that embraced animation, moving graphics, legible
typography, the geometric construction of screen space, and montages of
moving images that could have been stills, and by employing almost
exclusively formal elements in a two-dimensional frame, Bass’s visual
design anticipated our modern digital world. Ours is a world of split
frames, moving graphics, and computer-generated animation; a world of
iconic rather than indexical signs, of images cut at machine-gun speed; a
world of instant product identification and of logos worth dying for. The
clean modernist graphics, the open color fields, the interpolation of words
and images that we associate with Saul Bass and, by extension, with the
post–World War II era of Madmen are suddenly in style because they are
appropriate to the digital environment and because they teach today’s
designers of films, television shows, and computer games how to communicate with the audience. Finally, Bass’s best work challenges today’s
designers to create free spaces for audiences where they can not only consume images but also participate in the construction of their meaning. In
this sense, Bass’s legacy couldn’t have been greater.

355

Acknowledgments
This specific project began in the early 1990s when my colleague, poster
dealer Bob DePietro, first made me aware of Saul Bass’s magnificent film
posters. He sold me an Advise and Consent poster, which led to the purchase of Bonjour Tristesse and Saint Joan posters. My wife and I gave Saint
Joan to my mother-in-law, Janet Schirn, a well-known interior designer,
who had it hanging in her foyer for many years. However, my interest in
Gestalt theory began two decades earlier, when I was a graduate teaching
assistant for Donis A. Dondis in her Introduction to Communications
course at Boston University. Today, scholars consider Dondis’s A Primacy
for Visual Literacy (1973), which was our class text, the most important
interpretation of Gestalt art theory after Rudolf Arnheim and Gyorgy
Kepes. In 1979 I co-curated a reconstruction of the 1929 German exhibition “Film und Foto,” originally organized by Hans Richter and Laszlo
Moholy-Nagy and heavily influenced by Gestalt theory, so I was already
attuned to Bass’s work when I discovered his posters a decade later. In
June 1996 I participated as a film programmer at the Aspen International
Design Conference, which held a memorial tribute to Bass that year. Six
years later, while I was curator at the Hollywood Entertainment Museum,
I organized a Saul Bass poster and lobby card exhibition, “Saul Bass:
Designer.” It ran from 20 February to 13 April 2003 and concluded with
an evening reception for many of Bass’s former students and coworkers.
At the time I was already planning to write a book about Bass, but then a
new job as director of the UCLA Film and Television Archive kept me
busy elsewhere. However, after being named an Academy Scholar by the
Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences in 2006, I knew I had to
get to work.
First and foremost, then, I would like to thank the Academy of
Motion Picture Arts and Sciences, which allowed me to conduct the
research for this project. Thanks in particular to Shawn Guthrie and the
members of the Academy Scholars committee. The Margaret Herrick
Library and the Academy Film Archive now house the collections from

357

Acknowledgments
Bass’s estate, and the staffs of those two institutions could not have been
more helpful over the years. I thank them all for their kindness and goodwill. In particular, at the Herrick, I would like to thank Barbara Hall (now
director of the Warner Brothers Archives), Jenny Romero, Faye Thompson, Brad Roberts, Jeanie Braun, Kristine Kreuger, Janet Lorenz, Elizabeth Eiben, and all the wonderful people at the special collections desk:
Andrea Battiste, Marisa Duron, Michael Hartig, Mona Huntzing, Charlie
Qualls, Jonathan Wahl, Kevin Wilkerson, and Galen Wilkes. At the Academy Film Archive, I would like to thank May Haduong, Cassie Blake,
Mike Pogorselski, and Sean Savage. May Haduong was more than generous with her time during the research phase of this project. Sean Savage,
the resident archivist responsible for processing the Saul Bass Collection,
was invaluable not only in finding materials but also in serving as a discussion partner, and his ideas directly impacted this book.
Next, I would like to thank the friends and colleagues of Saul Bass
who spent time discussing his life’s work with me: Herb Yager, Al and
Trudi Kallis, Arnold and Isolde Schwartzman, James Hollander, Mike
Lonzo, Paula Goodman, Jeff Goodman, Jack Garfein, and Owen
Edwards. Mr. Kallis and Mr. Hollander, in particular, provided key images
that helped me formulate my overall narrative. I also had fruitful personal
and e-mail conversations with Bob DePietro, Foster Hirsch, Henning
Engelke, Justus Nieland, Neil Jaworski, Louise Sandhaus, and Melissa
Dollman.
I would like to thank my staff at the UCLA Film and Television
Archive, all of whom were supportive, but some of whom went beyond
the call of duty to track down films, images, and rights holders, especially
Todd Wiener, Joe Hunsberger, Nina Rao, Megan Doherty, Jeff Bickel,
Randy Yantek, and Mark Quigley. Former staff member Dino Everett,
now director of the Hugh Hefner Film Archive at the University of Southern California, provided some important shows from that collection. The
staff at the UCLA Library Special Collections and interlibrary loan desk
were invaluable in tracking down sources and in making the Stanley
Kramer Papers available, especially Peggy Alexander, Amy S. Wong, Cesar
Reyes, Sandra Farfan-Garcia, and Cindy Hollmichel. At the American
Film Institute, I would like to thank librarian Robert Vaughn for making
a crucial Saul Bass Oral History available to me. Research queries to the
University of Illinois’ Aspen International Design Conference Archive
were professionally handled by Gretchen Neidhardt, while Naomi Lederer

358

Acknowledgments
at Colorado State Library and Carol Ellis of the University of South Alabama Archives responded promptly to queries. Much of the preliminary
research was conducted with the help of my graduate assistant at UCLA,
Alexandra Schroeder, and my summer intern Adam Burnstine spent hours
combing through the Hollywood Reporter.
At the University Press of Kentucky I would like to thank my editor,
Anne Dean Dotson, and her assistant, Bailey E. Johnson, as well as copyeditor Linda Lotz. For permissions, I would like to thank Paul Ginsburg
and Roni Lubliner at NBC-Universal; Andrea Kalas and Larry McCallister at Paramount Pictures; Grover Crisp and Margarita Diaz at Sony Pictures; Julia Heath at Warner Brothers; Megan Bradford at MetroGoldwyn-Mayer; Andrea Fischer from the Artists Rights Society (ARS),
New York; and Juliet Kepes Stone, Ty Mattson, and Heidi Frautschi at
the Paul Klee Zentrum, Zurich.
Finally, I’d like to thank my wife, Martha (Mindy) F. Schirn, and my
daughter, Gianna Mei Li Horak, for their unwavering support while I
spent hour upon hour at my computer and, of necessity, neglected their
needs. Their indulgence is greatly appreciated.

359

Filmography
The Dark Mirror (1947, Robert Siodmak)
Trade advertisements
The Snake Pit (1947, Anatole Litvak)
Trade advertisements
Temptation (1947, Irving Pichel)
Trade advertisements
Champion (1949, Mark Robson)
Trade advertisements
Home of the Brave (1949, Mark Robson)
Trade advertisements
Without Honor (1949, Irving Pichel)
Trade advertisements
The Admiral Was a Lady
Trade advertisements
(1950, Albert S. Roegell)
All About Eve (1950, Joseph Mankiewicz)
Trade advertisements
Cyrano de Bergerac (1950, Michael Gordon)
Trade advertisements
The Men (1950, Fred Zinnemann)
Trade advertisements
No Way Out (1950, Joseph Mankiewicz)
Trade advertisements
The Sound of Fury (1950, Cy Endfield)
Trade advertisements
Death of a Salesman (1951, László Benedek)
Trade advertisements
Decision before Dawn (1951, Anatole Litvak)
Trade advertisements
Hard, Fast, and Beautiful (1951, Ida Lupino) Trade advertisements
M (1951, Joseph Losey)
Trade advertisements
The Scarf (1951, E. A. Dupont)
Trade advertisements
Androcles and the Lion (1952, Chester Erskine) Trade advertisements
The Big Sky (1952, Howard Hawks)
Trade advertisements
Clash by Night (1952, Fritz Lang)
Trade advertisements
The Four Poster (1952, Irving Reis)
Trade advertisements
The Happy Time (1952, Richard Fleischer)
Trade advertisements
High Noon (1952, Fred Zinnemann)
Trade advertisements
The Lusty Men (1952, Nicholas Ray)
Trade advertisements
Member of the Wedding (1952, Fred Zinnemann) Trade advertisements
My Six Convicts (1952, Hugo Fregonese)
Trade advertisements
The Sniper (1952, Edward Dmytryk)
Trade advertisements
The Moon Is Blue (1953, Otto Preminger)
Trade advertisements
Return to Paradise (1953, Mark Robson)
Trade advertisements
Carmen Jones (1954, Otto Preminger)
Poster, publicity, titles

361

Filmography
Magnificent Obsession (1954, Douglas Sirk)
Riot in Cell Block 11 (1954, Don Siegel)
A Star Is Born (1954, George Cukor)
Vera Cruz (1954, Robert Aldrich)
The Big Knife (1955, Robert Aldrich)
The Desperate Hours (1955, William Wyler)
Kiss Me Deadly (1955, Robert Aldrich)
The Man with the Golden Arm
(1955, Otto Preminger)
Mister Roberts (1955, John Ford,
Mervyn LeRoy)
My Sister Eileen (1955, Richard Quine)
Night of the Hunter (1955, Charles Laughton)
Not as a Stranger (1955, Stanley Kramer)
Pearl of the South Pacific (1955, Allan Dwan)
The Racers (1955, Henry Hathaway)
The Rose Tattoo (1955, Daniel Mann)
The Seven Year Itch (1955, Billy Wilder)
The Shrike (1955, José Ferrer)
Speedway (1955, TV)
Trial (1955, Mark Robson)
The Virgin Queen (1955, Henry Koster)
Around the World in 80 Days
(1956, Michael Anderson)
Attack! (1956, Robert Aldrich)
The Conqueror (1956, Dick Powell)
Giant (1956, George Stevens)
Johnny Concho (1956, Don McGuire)
On the Threshold of Space
(1956, Robert D. Webb)
Playhouse 90 (1956, TV)
Somebody up There Likes Me
(1956, Robert Wise)

362

Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Titles
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Poster, publicity, titles
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements,
titles
Trade advertisements
Titles
Trade advertisements,
titles
Television commercials,
advertising
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Titles
Trade advertisements,
titles
Trade advertisements
Trade advertisements
Titles
Trade advertisements
Bumpers
Trade advertisements

Filmography
Storm Center (1956, Daniel Taradash)

Sun Detergents (1956, TV)
This Week (1956, TV)
Trapeze (1956, Carol Reed)
Blitz beer (1957, TV)
Edge of the City (1957, Martin Ritt)

Frank Sinatra Show (1957, TV)
Love in the Afternoon (1957, Billy Wilder)
National Bohemian beer (1957, TV)
Patterns of Life (1957, TV)
The Pride and the Passion
(1957, Stanley Kramer)
Saint Joan (1957, Otto Preminger)

The Young Stranger
(1957, John Frankenheimer)
The Big Country (1958, William Wyler)
Bonjour Tristesse (1958, Otto Preminger)

Cowboy (1958, Delmar Daves)
The Defiant Ones (1958, Stanley Kramer)
The Naked Eye (1958, Louis Clyde Stouman)
2nd San Francisco International
Film Festival (1958)
Vertigo (1958, Alfred Hitchcock)

Trade advertisements,
letterhead, promotional material, titles
Television commercial
Titles
Titles
Television commercials
Poster, trade
advertising,
promotional material,
titles
Bumpers, titles
Poster, trade
advertisements
Advertising, television
commercials
Titles
Trailer, promotional
material, premiere
invitation, titles
Poster, trade
advertisements,
promotional material,
television spot, titles
Promotional
material, titles
Poster, titles
Poster, letterhead,
promotional material,
titles
Titles
Trade advertisements
Poster, trade
advertisements
Poster
Poster, advertising,
titles

363

Filmography
Anatomy of a Murder (1959, Otto Preminger)

Porgy and Bess (1959, Otto Preminger)
Faces and Fortunes (1959, Morton Goldsholl
and Millie Goldsholl)
Four Just Men (1959, TV)
North by Northwest (1959, Alfred Hitchcock)
Olin Mathieson Small World (1959, TV)
San Francisco International Film Festival (1959)
White King (1959, TV)
Exodus (1960, Otto Preminger)

The Facts of Life (1960, Melvin Frank)
History of Packaging (1960, TV)
Magnificent Seven (1960, John Sturges)
Ocean’s Eleven (1960, Lewis Milestone)
Psycho (1960, Alfred Hitchcock)
Rainier beer (1960, TV)
San Francisco International Film Festival
(1960)
Some Like It Hot (1960, Billy Wilder)
Spartacus (1960, Stanley Kubrick)

Poster, advertising,
letterhead,
promotional material,
television spot
Titles (unfinished)
Assistant director
Titles
Titles
Titles
Poster
Television commercial
Poster, trade
advertising, letterhead,
titles
Titles
Television commercial
Trade advertisements
Titles
Pictorial consultant,
titles
Television commercials
Poster
Trade advertisements
Design consultant,
titles
Trade advertisements
Titles
Poster

The Sundowners (1960, Fred Zinnemann)
Alcoa Premiere (1961, TV)
5th San Francisco International Film Festival
(1961)
Judgment at Nuremberg (1961, Stanley Kramer) Poster, letterhead
One, Two, Three (1961, Billy Wilder)
Poster, trade
advertisements
PM East/PM West (1961–1962, TV)
Bumpers, titles
Something Wild (1961, Jack Garfein)
Titles
West Side Story (1961, Robert Wise)
Poster, prologue, visual
consultant, titles

364

Filmography
Advise and Consent (1962, Otto Preminger)

Band-Aid (1962, TV)
Apples and Oranges (1962, Lou Dorfman
and George Bristol)
The Best of Bolshoi (1962, TV)
Birdman of Alcatraz
(1962, John Frankenheimer)
The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse
(1962, Vincente Minnelli)
History of Invention (1962, IBM)
Icarus Montgolfier Wright
(1962, Osmond Evans)
Men against Cancer (1962, IBM)
Mennen Baby Bath (1962, TV)
Mennen Baby Magic (1962, TV)
Orientation IBM (1962, IBM)
The Sale of Manhattan (1962, TV)
Walk on the Wild Side
(1962, Edward Dmytryk)
Andy Williams Show (1963, TV)
The Cardinal (1963, Otto Preminger)
It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World
(1963, Stanley Kramer)
National Bohemian beer, Andy Parker—
Regular Guy (1963–1965, TV)
Nine Hours to Rama (1963, Mark Robson)

Poster, promotional
material, trade
advertisements, titles
Television commercial
Visual design
Animated preludes
Window cards
Montage sequences,
trade advertisements
Television commercial
Titles
Television commercial
Television commercial
Television commercial
Television commercial
Animated sequence
Titles
Titles
Posters, promotional
material, titles
Poster, promotional
material, titles
Television commercials

Letterhead, trade
advertising, titles
Seven Days in May (1963, John Frankenheimer) Titles (uncredited)
7th San Francisco International Film Festival
Poster
(1963)
The Victors (1963, Carl Foreman)
Prologue, titles
8th San Francisco International Film Festival
Poster
(1964)
From Here to There (1964, Saul Bass)
Producer, director
Hallmark Hall of Fame (1964, TV)
Titles

365

Filmography
Profiles in Courage (1964, TV)
The Searching Eye (1964, Saul Bass)
2nd New York Film Festival (1964)
Bunny Lake Is Missing (1965, Otto Preminger)

In Harm’s Way (1965, Otto Preminger)

Grand Prix (1966, John Frankenheimer)
Not with My Wife, You Don’t
(1966, Norman Panama)
Seconds (1966, John Frankenheimer)
Hurry Sundown (1967, Otto Preminger)
The Two of Us (1967, Claude Berri)
Bridgestone tires (1968, TV)
Fireman’s Ball (1968, Milos Forman)
The Fixer (1968, John Frankenheimer)
RCA “The Kid” (1968, TV)
Very Happy Alexander (1968, Yves Robert)
Why Man Creates (1968, Saul Bass)
Mattel Baby Tenderlove (1969, TV)
Tell Me That You Love Me, Junie Moon
(1970, Otto Preminger)
Such Good Friends (1971, Otto Preminger)

Titles
Producer, director
Poster
Poster, promotional
material, trade
advertisements, titles
Poster, promotional
material, advertising,
titles
Montage sequences,
titles
Visual consultant, titles
Poster, promotional
material, titles
Sound-track album
cover
Poster, promotional
material, book cover
Television commercial
Poster, promotional
material
Poster, promotional
material
Television commercial
Poster, promotional
material
Producer, director
Television commercial
Poster

Poster, promotional
material
10th Chicago International Film Festival (1973) Poster
11th Chicago International Film Festival (1974) Poster
The Party (1974, Bob Adler)
Producer
Phase IV (1974, Saul Bass)
Director

366

Filmography
Titles

The Taking of Pelham 1 2 3
(1974, Joseph Sargent)
Dixie Cups (1975, TV)
Rayovac batteries (1975, TV)
Rosebud (1975, Otto Preminger)

Television commercials
Television commercial
Poster, promotional
material
NBC: The First 50 Years (1976, TV)
Opening sequence
That’s Entertainment II (1976, Gene Kelly)
Titles
Bass on Titles (1977, Saul Bass)
Poster, director
Brothers (1977, Arthur Baron)
Poster, promotional
material
Girl Scout cookies (1977, TV)
Television commercial
Looking for Mr. Goodbar
Titles (unused)
(1977, Richard Brooks)
100 Years of the Telephone (1977, Saul Bass)
Producer, director
Windows aka Notes on the Popular Arts
Poster, producer,
(1977, Saul Bass)
director
Apocalypse Now (1979, Francis Ford Coppola) Photographer
The Double McGuffin (1979, Joe Camp)
Poster
The Human Factor (1979, Otto Preminger)
Poster, promotional
material
Security Pacific Bank (1979, TV)
Television commercial
The Shining (1980, Stanley Kubrick)
Poster, promotional
material
The Solar Film (1980, Saul Bass)
Poster, producer,
director
Filmex ’81 (1981)
Poster
Quest (1983, Saul Bass)
Poster, producer,
director
20th Chicago Film Festival (1984)
Poster
Filmex Los Angeles (1985)
Poster
Broadcast News (1987, James L. Brooks)
Titles
Big (1988, Penny Marshall)
Titles
Talk Radio (1988, Oliver Stone)
Poster
Tonkô/The Silk Road (1988, Jun’ya Satô)
Poster, titles
National Film Registry, Library of Congress
Animated logo
(1989)

367

Filmography
Return from the River Kwai (1989,
Poster
Andrew V. McLagen)
6th Israel Film Festival in the USA (1989)
Poster
The War of the Roses (1989, Danny DeVito)
Titles
Goodfellas (1990, Martin Scorsese)
Titles
Matushita (1990, TV)
Television commercial
Cape Fear (1991, Martin Scorsese)
Titles
Doc Hollywood (1991, Michael Caton-Jones)
Titles
Preminger: Anatomy of a Filmmaker
Titles
(1991, Valerie A. Robins)
63rd Academy Awards (1991)
Poster
Israel Film Festival (1992)
Poster
Motion Picture Centennial (1992)
Poster
Mr. Saturday Night (1992, Billy Crystal)
Titles
The Age of Innocence (1993, Martin Scorsese)
Titles
A Bronx Tale (1993, Robert De Niro)
Titles
Schindler’s List (1993, Steven Spielberg)
Poster, advertising
65th Academy Awards (1993)
Poster
Cancion de Cuna (1994, José Luis Garci)
Poster
66th Academy Awards (1994)
Poster
30th Chicago Film Festival (1994)
Poster
Under Suspicion (1994, Simon Moore)
Titles
Beyond the Clouds
Titles (unrealized)
(1995, Michelangelo Antonioni)
Casino (1995, Martin Scorsese)
Titles
Higher Learning (1995, John Singleton)
Titles
A Personal Journey with Martin Scorsese
Titles
through American Movies (1995, Martin Scorsese)
67th Academy Awards (1995)
Poster
68th Academy Awards (1996)
Poster
Psycho (1998, Gus Van Sant)
Titles (based on Bass)

368

Notes
Abbreviations
AMPAS
CSULB
MPAA

Academy of Motion Picture Arts and Sciences
California State University at Long Beach
Motion Picture Association of America

Introduction: Qui êtes-vous, Saul Bass?
1. Saul Bass Academy Award Acceptance, 16mm black-and-white clip, Saul Bass
Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
2. Interview with James Hollander, 31 October 2012, Burbank, CA.
3. In 1989 Bass actually designed the moving image logo for the National Film
Registry.
4. AT&T seminar manuscript, 1988, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
5. Hollander interview, 2012.
6. Interview with Arnold Schwartzman, 20 February 2013, Los Angeles.
Schwartzman went on to direct the Academy Award–winning documentary Genocide
(1982). See Arnold Schwartzman, A Persistence of Vision: Arnold Schwartzman Profiles of His Work in Graphic Design and Film (Mulgrave, Australia: Images Publishing,
2005).
7. “A Discussion with Producer Cara McKenney, and Creative Directors Steve
Fuller and Mark Gardner,” in The Art of the Title, 19 September 2011, http://www
.artofthetitle.com/title/mad-men/. See also a review of Mad Men that calls the Bassinspired title sequence one of the best ever: http://www.ellistabletalk.com/2013
/01/02/the-way-we-were-matthew-weiners-mad-men/.
8. David Geffner, “First Things First,” Filmmaker Magazine 6, no. 1 (Fall 1997),
http://www.filmmakermagazine.com/issues/fa111997/firstthingsfirst.php.
9. See “Dexter Intro by Ty Mattson,” YouTube, https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=n9adZ0HRu04.
10. David Peters, “Every Frame Counts,” Eye Magazine 66 (Winter 2007),
http://www.eyemagazine.com/feature/article/every-frame-counts.
11. Geffner, “First Things First.”
12. Jeffrey Wells, “Saul Bass in ‘Devil’ Poster,” Hollywood Elsewhere, http://www
.hollywood-elsewhere.com/2007/09/saul_bass_in_de.php.
13. An Interview with Saul Bass—Outstanding 20th Century Designer Series,

369

Notes to Pages 7–11
directed by David Cronister, 3 May 1979, DVD 7932-2-1, Saul Bass Collection,
Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
14. Saul Bass, “A Definition of Creativity,” Design: The Magazine of Creative Art 60
(March–April 1959): 144. See also Saul Bass, “Creativity in Visual Communication,” in
Creativity: An Examination of the Creative Process, ed. Paul Smith (New York: Hastings
House, 1959), 122–23, in which the anecdote is repeated word for word.
15. Lorraine Wild, “That Was Then, and This Is Now: But What Is Next?” Émigré 39 (1996), http://www.emigre.com/Editorial.php?sect=1&id=18. See also
Lorraine Wild, “Europeans in America,” in Graphic Design in America: A Visual
Language History, ed. Mildred Friedman et al. (New York: Harry Abrams, 1989),
152–69.
16. David Badder, Bob Baker, and Markku Salmi, “Saul Bass,” Film Dope 3
(August 1973): 6.
17. Owen Edwards, “Saul Bass” (unpublished manuscript, ca. 1992), 55, box
21A, file 10, “Biography,” Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. Bass
redlined the quote, possibly indicating that it revealed too much.
18. Ibid., 56.
19. Schwartzman interview, 2013.
20. Interview with Mike Lonzo, 19 September 2012, Hollywood.
21. Schwartzman interview, 2013.
22. Bass, “Creativity in Visual Communication,” 127.
23. I’m grateful to Richard Walter, my colleague at the UCLA School of Theatre,
Film, and Television, for this anecdote.
24. Mamoru Shimokochi, “Art Goodman. A Tribute,” Graphic Design USA 5
(May 2009): 82. Goodman was born on 18 May 1925 and died on 2 October 2008
in Los Angeles.
25. Ibid. When Goodman retired in 1993, Bass apparently refused to make an
announcement or throw him a retirement party. Bass didn’t want anyone to know
that Goodman was gone. The mythology that Bass did everything had to be
maintained.
26. Lou Dorfsman, interview with Andreas Timmer, 6 November 1997, quoted
in Andreas A. Timmer, “Making the Ordinary Extraordinary: The Film-Related Work
of Saul Bass” (PhD diss., Columbia University, 1999), 31.
27. Interview with Herb Yager, 27 February 2013, Ojai, CA.
28. Ibid.
29. Interview with Jeff Okun, 23 March 2012, Hollywood.
30. Jennifer Bass and Pat Kirkham, Saul Bass: A Life in Film and Design (London:
Laurence King Publishing, 2011), 23.
31. Ibid.
32. In both films, Elaine received credit for conception and design, but Saul took
sole credit for direction. In the case of Notes on the Popular Arts (1977), Elaine Bass
received credit as coproducer.
33. Jack Solomon Agency, “Elaine Bass. Biography,” n.d., Solar Film file, press
materials, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.

370

Notes to Pages 12–18
34. American Film Institute Seminar with Saul Bass, 16 May 1979 (Beverly Hills,
CA: Center for Advanced Film Studies, 1979). This forty-page, single-spaced document is available only at the American Film Institute’s Louis B. Mayer Library.
35. Telephone interview with Owen Edwards, 18 January 2013.
36. “Saul Bass [Interview],” Designer Magazine, May 1980, 10.
37. Joe Morgenstern, “Saul Bass” (unpublished manuscript, 1994), 33, box 21A,
file 2, “Biography—Manuscript,” Saul Bass Collection, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
38. Lonzo interview, 2012.
39. See Wild, “Europeans in America,” 159.
40. Saul Bass, “Cover,” Arts & Architecture 65, no. 11 (November 1948): 2.
41. Saul Bass, “Film Advertising. Filmwerbung. La publicité pour le film,” Graphis
9, no. 48 (1953): 276–89.
42. See Herb Yager, “Saul Bass,” Graphis 33, no. 193 (1977–1978): 392; Henry
Wolf, “Saul Bass,” Graphis 41, no. 235 (January–February 1985): 28. For a history of
Graphis, see its website: http://www.graphis.com/history/.
43. Catherine Sullivan, “The Work of Saul Bass,” American Artist 18, no. 8
(October 1954): 31.
44. “The West Coast: A Designer’s View,” Industrial Design 4, no. 10 (October
1957): 74.
45. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 10–11.
46. “Bass Badly Hurt on Way to Awards,” Variety, 21 February 1949, 3.
47. See AIGA Medal, http://www.aiga.org/medalist-saulbass/.
48. Reyner Banham, ed., The Aspen Papers: Twenty Years of Design Theory from the
International Design Conference in Aspen (New York: Praeger Publishers, 1974), 5.
49. See “IDCA Bare Bones Filmmaking,” VHS tape, 13077-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
50. That year I hosted a German avant-garde film series at the conference and was
able to attend the event honoring Bass.
51. Fred Hift, “And that Cramps Film Ads—Bass,” Variety, 20 November 1957, 7.
52. This is based on an informal and wholly unscientific study in which illustrations
of Bass’s work from all known publications were tabulated.
53. Given the rise in Hitchcock’s critical reputation in the last thirty years, those
figures would probably look different today.
54. American Film Institute Seminar, 1–2.
55. Letter from Saul Bass to Margaret Kaplan, Harry Abrams & Co., 8 May 1980,
box 21A, file 7, “Biography Correspondence,” Saul Bass Collection, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
56. Yager interview, 2013.
57. Founded in 1978, American Photographer ceased publication in 1989, so the
book series Documents of American Design probably started immediately afterward.
The only book published was Alexey Brodovitch/Andy Gruenberg (New York: H. N.
Abrams, 1989). Edwards telephone interview, 2013.
58. Yager interview, 2013. According to Yager, Edwards was on Bass’s payroll.

371

Notes to Pages 18–22
59. Edwards, “Saul Bass.”
60. Although Morgenstern’s unpublished manuscript at AMPAS is dated 18 October 1994, this was apparently the second draft. There is another undated draft that,
based on correspondence, was delivered in April 1994.
61. Letter from Don Congdon to Saul Bass, 13 October 1994; letter from Gillian
Casey Sowell (Simon and Schuster) to Don Congdon, 29 November 1994, box 21A, file
7, “Biography Correspondence,” Saul Bass Collection, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
62. Memo from “Wendy” to Saul Bass and Herb Yager, 15 April 1994, ibid.
63. Letter from Herb Yager to Joe Morgenstern, 22 July 1994, ibid.
64. Timmer, “Making the Ordinary Extraordinary,” 227.
65. Noell Wolfram Evans, “Saul Bass: A Film Title Pioneer,” Digital Media F/X,
http://www.digitalmediafx.com/Features/saulbass.html.
66. Emily King, “Taking Credit: Film Title Sequences, 1955–1965” (master’s
thesis, Royal College of Art, 1994), http://www.typotheque.com/articles/
taking_credit_film_title_sequences_1955–1965_9_conclusion.
67. See, for example, Mary Beth Haralovich, “Motion Picture Advertising: Industrial and Social Forces and Effects, 1930–1948” (PhD diss., University of Wisconsin–
Madison, 1984), and Mark Thomas McGee, Beyond Ballyhoo: Motion Picture
Promotion and Gimmicks (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1989).
68. Emily King, A Century of Movie Posters, from Silent to Art House (London:
Mitchell and Beasily, 2003).
69. Ross Melnick, American Showman: Samuel “Roxy” Rothafel and the Birth of the
Entertainment Industry, 1908–1935 (New York: Columbia University Press, 2012).
70. François Truffaut, Hitchcock (New York: Simon and Schuster, 1967), 207–8.
71. Philip Oakes, “Coming On: Bass Note,” London Sunday Times, 9 December
1973, 36.
72. American Film Institute Seminar, 40.
73. Stephen Rebello, Alfred Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho (New York:
Dembner Books, 1990), 112.
74. See, for example, Philip J. Skerry, The Shower Scene in Hitchcock’s Psycho: Creating Cinematic Suspense and Terror (Lewiston, NY: Edwin Mellon Press, 2005).
75. Stephen Rebello, “Psycho,” Cinefantastique 16, no. 4/5 (October 1986):
48–77; Rebello, Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho.
76. See Hitchcock (2012), directed by Sacha Gervasi, script by John J. McLaughlin, starring Anthony Hopkins and Helen Mirren. Wallace Langham is credited with
playing the role of Saul Bass in the film, but he only lurks in the background; if he had
a speaking line, I missed it.
77. Pat Kirkham, “Reassessing the Saul Bass and Alfred Hitchcock Collaboration,”
West 86th Street 18, no. 1 (Spring 2011), http://www.west86th.bgc.bard.edu/
articles/kirkham-bass-hitchcock.html.
78. Raymond Durgnat, A Long Hard Look at ‘Psycho’ (London: BFI Publishing,
2002). See also excerpts at http://sensesofcinema.com/2002/20/durgnat_psycho/.
79. Mary Glucksman: “Saul Bass: Due Credit,” Screen International, 13 May
1994, 28.

372

Notes to Pages 23–35
80. David James, The Most Typical Avant-Garde: History and Geography of Minor
Cinemas in Los Angeles (Berkeley: University of California Press, 2005), 14–15.
81. Miriam Bratu Hansen, “The Mass Production of the Senses: Classical Cinema
as Vernacular Modernism,” Modernism/Modernity 6, no. 2 (1999): 59–77.
82. According to Andrew Tracy, the essay film has only recently been identified
and named by film scholars. Apart from the films of the filmmakers mentioned in the
text, Tracy lists Vigo’s À propos de Nice (1930), Ivens’s Rain (1929), Buñuel’s Las
hurdes (1933), Resnais’s Night and Fog (1955), Rouch and Morin’s Chronicle of a
Summer (1961), Akerman’s Je, Tu, Il, Elle (1974), Welles’s F for Fake (1973), Straub
and Huillet’s Trop tôt, trop tard (1982), Getino and Solanas’s The Hour of the Furnaces
(1968), Portabella’s Informe general . . . (1976), and Andersen’s Los Angeles Plays
Itself (2003). Andrew Tracy, “The Essay Film,” http://www.bfi.org.uk/news-opinion/sight-sound-magazine/features/deep-focus/essay-film.
83. Quoted in ibid.
84. See Lev Manovich, The Language of New Media (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press,
2002), 250, http://www.manovich.net/LNM/Manovich.pdf.
85. Interview with Jeff Okun, 6 June 2011, Studio City, CA.
86. See 6 Chapters in Design: Saul Bass, Ivan Chermayeff, Milton Glaser, Paul
Rand, Ikko Tanaka, Henryk Tomaszewski (San Francisco: Chronicle Books, 1997).

1. Designer and Filmmaker
1. See An Interview with Saul Bass—20th Century Designer Series, directed by
David Cronister, 3 May 1979, DVD PF4720, 7932-2-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
2. Ibid.
3. “The World Masters 1: Saul Bass,” IDEA 38, no. 219 (March 1990): 20.
4. Douglas Bell, “An Oral History with Saul Bass,” 20, 39 (Oral History Project,
1996), Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
5. Peter Bogdanovich, John Ford (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1978).
6. Interview with Saul Bass, 1979, written, directed, and produced by Prof.
Archie Boston Jr., CSULB, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
7. Interview with Albert and Trude Kallis, 26 July 2012, Beverly Hills, CA.
8. Lewis Blackwell, “Bass Instinct,” Creative Review 15 (1 May 1995): 48.
9. Interview with Saul Bass, 1986, written, directed, and produced by Prof.
Archie Boston Jr., CSULB, Videotape PF4719, 20459-3, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
10. Interview with Arnold Schwartzman, 21 February 2013, Los Angeles. See also
Philip Thompson and Peter Davenport, eds., Dictionary of Visual Language (London:
Bergstom and Boyle Books, 1980), 23, which juxtaposes Rand’s 1946 advertisement
for Orbach’s with Bass’s Love in the Afternoon (1956) poster, both of which utilize
text on a shade that has been pulled down.
11. The best source for biographical information is Pat Kirkham’s authorized essay
in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 3–25.
12. “Saul Bass & Associates,” special issue of IDEA (1979): 128. See also Sally

373

Notes to Pages 35–37
Anderson-Bruce, Childhood Fantasies: Champion Kromekote 2000 (Stamford, CT:
Champion International Corporation, 1991), in which Bass poses as an
archaeologist.
13. Founded in 1875, the Art Students League boasts a stellar list of former students and instructors. The former category includes Winslow Homer, Norman Rockwell, Jackson Pollock, Alexander Calder, Helen Frankenthaler, Roy Lichtenstein,
Georgia O’Keefe, Man Ray, Ben Shahn, Red Grooms, Frank Stella, and many
others.
14. Morgenstern, “Saul Bass,” 6.
15. See Bell, “Oral History with Saul Bass,” 8–9.
16. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 8.
17. Lee Kerry, “The Man with the Golden Mind,” Adweek, 14 September 1987.
18. A Film Daily story notes: “Representing the Guild in the demonstration, given
before a large crowd in the street outside, were Ben (RKO) Rogers, Bob (Warner)
Fels, and Saul (Warner) Bass.” See Phil M. Daly, “Along the Rialto,” Film Daily 82,
no. 116 (June 1942): 4.
19. See Gyorgy Kepes, The Language of Vision (Chicago: Paul Theobald, 1944).
20. Catherine Sullivan, “The Work of Saul Bass,” American Artist 18, no. 8
(October 1954): 31.
21. See Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, The New Vision: From Material to Architecture (New
York: Brewer, Warren and Putnam, 1930).
22. Bell, “Oral History with Saul Bass,” 10.
23. Quoted in Edwards, “Saul Bass,” 14. Both Edwards and Morgenstern repeat
the same anecdote. See also An Interview with Saul Bass—20th Century Designer
Series.
24. Quoted in Gerard van der Leun, “That Old Bass Magic,” United Mainliner
25, no. 3 (March 1981): 63.
25. Buchanan & Company advertisement in Variety, 13 May 1947, 10. See also
“3½ Million Bally Coin Back of IP Pix,” Film Daily, 22 July 1946, 12, which
announced International Pictures’ publicity budget for the coming season, with Bass
and Rudin participating in the campaigns.
26. Meredith Keeve, “Saul Bass,” Zoom 34 (February 1988): 63.
27. “Bass Badly Hurt on Way to Awards,” Variety, 21 February 1949, 3.
28. Edwards, “Saul Bass.”
29. “Bass Breezes Back,” Daily Variety, 12 July 1950, 9.
30. “‘Group Think’ Killing Selling Slants?” Variety, 11 February 1959, 3.
31. See reproductions for Death of a Salesman, Decision before Dawn, and The
Sniper in Saul Bass’s first documented, published essay: Saul Bass, “Film Advertising;
Filmwerbung, La publicité por le film,” Graphis 9, no. 48 (1953): 279. See also the
premiere invitation to Death of a Salesman, 20 December 1951, Warner Beverly Hills
Theatre, box 336, Scrapbook, Collection 161, Stanley Kramer Papers, UCLA Special
Collections.
32. See reproductions of trade ads in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 16–19.
33. “Chatter,” Variety, 27 August 1951, 6.

374

Notes to Pages 38–42
34. See Ken Coupland, “Saul Bass: The Name behind the Titles,” Graphis 54, no.
316 (July–August 1998): 102; Mary Glucksman, “Saul Bass: Due Credit,” Screen
International, 13 May 1994, 27.
35. Kallis interview, 2012.
36. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 21n83.
37. See “The West Coast: A Designer’s View,” Industrial Design 4, no. 10 (October 1957): 74; Sullivan, “Work of Saul Bass,” 67.
38. Interview with Mike Lonzo, 20 September 2012, Hollywood, CA.
39. Interview with James Hollander, 31 October 2012, Burbank, CA.
40. Both Edwards and Morgenstern name Elaine as the first employee Bass hired.
According to Edwards, Bass met Elaine, who was a design student, at the 1957 Aspen
Conference and hired her there. He claims Bass’s marriage to Ruth was already shaky
because she didn’t appreciate or understand Saul’s work. See Morgenstern, “Saul
Bass,” 32; Edwards, “Saul Bass,” 50.
41. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 24.
42. Yager, for his part, maintained that Marsh knew nothing about marketing.
When Yager came on board in 1974, Marsh insisted on reading and correcting every
letter Yager wrote. When Yager resisted, Marsh complained to Bass, but Marsh soon
realized that Bass had given Yager authority over all financial matters, so he left the
firm voluntarily. Interview with Herb Yager, 27 February 2013, Ojai, CA.
43. Sullivan, “Work of Saul Bass,” 28.
44. See reproductions in ibid., 29–31; Ludwig Ebenhöh, “Saul Bass, USA,” Gebrauchsgraphik 27, no. 11 (November 1956): 12–21; Georgine Oeri, “Saul Bass,”
Graphis 11, no. 59 (1955): 258–65.
45. Quoted in R. Roger Remington and Barbara Hodik, Nine Pioneers in American Graphic Design (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1989), 4.
46. See van der Leun, “That Old Bass Magic,” 64.
47. For example, according to a Bass account executive, they were billing Rockwell
International $75,000 to $90,000 a month, for a total of almost $2 million, in 1968.
See LogoDesignLove, “The Cost of a Bass Logo,” http://www.logodesignlove
.com/saul-bass-logo-cost.
48. Adam Duncan Harris, “Extra Credits: The History and Collection of Pacific
Title and Art Studio” (PhD diss., University of Minnesota, 2000), 222.
49. Ebenhöh, “Saul Bass, USA,” 12.
50. Press book for Carmen Jones (20th Century–Fox, 1954), 4, microfilm, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
51. Joanne Stang, “Movie (Title) Mogul,” New York Times, 1 December 1957,
D1.
52. Quoted in Pamela Haskin, “Saul, Can You Make Me a Title?” Film Quarterly
50, no. 1 (Fall 1996): 11.
53. Ibid., 12.
54. Truffaut, Hitchcock, 207–9.
55. “Saul Bass: Portfolio of a Versatile Designer’s Work,” Print 15, no. 3 (May–
June 1961): 35–46.

375

Notes to Pages 42–46
56. “West Coast: A Designer’s View,” 74.
57. See Ebenhöh, “Saul Bass, USA,” 20: “Saul Bass who works as a designer in
Hollywood is a typical representative of even that American style.” See also Sullivan,
“Work of Saul Bass,” 28.
58. Richard Caplan, “Designs by Saul Bass,” Industrial Design 5, no. 10 (October
1958): 88.
59. “Andy Parker aka Regular Joe,” National Bohemian beer commercial, 1 minute, 217268-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
60. See Business Screen Magazine 24, no. 4 (1963): 381.
61. See “Apples and Oranges—Food for Thought. How CBS Sells a Concept,”
Telefilm 8, no. 5 (May 1963): 30–31, 38.
62. According to Klynn’s obituary, “Herbert Klynn, former UPA President and
longtime president of Format Productions collaborated with Ted Geisel (Dr. Seuss),
Saul Bass, and Ray Bradbury” on the film, but Bass may have done only the titles at
the end of the film. See “Herbert Klynn Obituary,” Variety, 8 February 1999, 91.
63. See Mina Hamilton, “N.Y. World’s Fair Film Preview,” Industrial Design 11
(April 1964): 35–36, 40–43; Mina Hamilton, “Films at the Fair II: A Comparative
Review,” Industrial Design 12 (May 1964): 40–41.
64. Bass also traveled to the Philippines in 1974 to photograph the Major Kurtz
headquarters set, where the film’s climax occurs. Approximately 178 35mm slides of
the shoot survive. See “Apocalypse Now—On Set Photography,” Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
65. James Powers, “Saul Bass Plans Short Feature on Social Changes,” Hollywood
Reporter 217, no. 7 (19 July 1971): 2.
66. “Cable Column: An Interview with Saul Bass,” Z Magazine 2, no. 3 (August–
September 1975): 21.
67. “Saul Bass Busy Writing, Directing Theatrical Project,” Hollywood Reporter
253, no. 7 (September 1978): 8.
68. See Telex from Yamaguchi to Saul Bass, 1 July 1983, Quest Data Service File,
Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
69. “Saul Bass & Associates Changes Its Moniker,” Daily Variety, 13 October
1978, 6; “Saul Bass & Associates,” special issue of IDEA (1979): 132.
70. Steven Heller, “Why Design Declined at CBS: A Conversation with Lou
Dorfsman,” Print 44, no. 6 (November–December 1990): 100. Although Dorfsman
doesn’t specify dates, one negotiation apparently took place in 1973, after Dorfsman’s
mentor at CBS, Frank Stanton, retired.
71. Bass also did the initial title designs for Steven Soderbergh’s Sex, Lies, and Videotape (1989), but his concept of having a woman wrapped in videotape or showing videotape from a VHS cassette unspooling to form the image of a woman was not pursued
by Soderbergh or Harvey Weinstein, the film’s producer. See box 111A, file 9, “Sex, Lies,
and Videotape—titles,” Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
72. Yager interview, 2013.
73. See the English translation of the original German at http://bauhaus-online
.de/en/atlas/das-bauhaus/idee/manifest.

376

Notes to Pages 47–59
74. Lorraine Wild, “Europeans in America,” in Graphic Design in America: A
Visual Language History, ed. Mildred Friedman et al. (New York: Harry Abrams,
1989), 168.
75. Lazlo Moholy-Nagy, Vision in Motion (New York: Paul Theobald, 1965).
76. See Jan-Christopher Horak, “The Films of Moholy-Nagy,” Afterimage 13, no.
1/2 (Summer 1985), reprinted in Jan-Christopher Horak, Making Images Move: Photographers and Avant-Garde Cinema (Washington, DC: Smithsonian Press, 1997).
77. “Brooklyn Drafts New Art Policy,” New York Times, 10 May 1942.
78. Lorraine Wild, “Modern American Graphics II: The Birth of a Profession,”
Industrial Design, July–August 1983, 56.
79. Sullivan, “Work of Saul Bass,” 31.
80. Moholy-Nagy, New Vision (1930), 14, 60.
81. Timmer, “Making the Ordinary Extraordinary,” 13–14.
82. Interview with Saul Bass (CSULB, 1986). See also Moholy-Nagy, New Vision
(1930), 58.
83. Moholy-Nagy, New Vision (1930), 30, 35.
84. Ibid., 32.
85. Kepes, Language of Vision, 13.
86. Gyorgy Kepes, “Education of the Eye,” More Business 3, no. 11 (November
1938), quoted in Hans M. Wingler, The Bauhaus: Weimar, Dessau, Berlin, Chicago
(Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1969), 197.
87. Bell, “Oral History with Saul Bass,” 5.
88. Ibid., 10.
89. Kepes, Language of Vision, 221.
90. Ibid., 17–27.
91. Ibid., 44–51.
92. Ibid., 59.
93. Ibid., 20; Daily Variety, 1 November 1950, 16.
94. Bell, “Oral History with Saul Bass,” 28.
95. Kepes, Language of Vision, 67.
96. Ibid., 98.
97. Ibid., 130.
98. Ibid., 200.
99. Ibid., 207.
100. Ibid.
101. Ibid., 92, 220; Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 161.
102. See a reproduction of the advertisement in Dick Hess and Marion Muller,
Dorfsman & CBS (New York: American Showcase, 1987), 68.
103. See Kepes, Language of Vision, 87, 183. See also Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass,
19, 33.
104. Kallis interview, 2012.
105. Janet Staiger, “Announcing Wares, Winning Patrons, Voicing Ideals: Thinking
about the History and Theory of Film Advertising,” Cinema Journal 29, no. 3 (Spring
1990): 8.

377

Notes to Pages 59–72
106. See a selection of silent and early sound movie ads in Russell C. Sweeney, Coming Next Week: A Pictorial History of Film Advertising (New York: Castle Books,
1973).
107. Emil T. Noah Jr., Movie Gallery: A Pictorial History of Motion Picture Advertisements (Fort Lauderdale, FL: Noah Communications, 1980), 11.
108. See a reproduction of the ad in Joe Morella, Edward Z. Epstein, and Eleonor
Clark, Those Great Movie Ads (New Rochelle, NY: Arlington House, 1972), 294.
109. Ibid., 81.
110. Sullivan, “Work of Saul Bass,” 28.
111. Advertisement for Hard, Fast, and Beautiful in Daily Variety, 6 September
1951, 6.
112. Reproduced in Ebenhöh, “Saul Bass, USA,” 18.
113. “Fatalistic Fugue: Bonjour Tristesse,” Newsweek, 20 January 1958, 89–90,
quoted in Lowell E. Redelings, “The Hollywood Scene,” Hollywood Citizen News, 22
January 1958, 7–8.
114. Interview with Saul Bass (CSULB, 1986).
115. James Woudhuysen, “Bass Profundo,” Design Week, 22 September 1989, 17.
116. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 43.
117. See “Rainbow Bass—alphabet,” box 37A, file 9, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS. A letter dated 5 May 1983 from Art Goodman (box 37A,
file 38, “Art Goodman,” ibid.) indicates the typography was submitted for an award
but didn’t win.
118. Fred Hift, “And that Cramps Film Ads—Bass,” Variety, 20 November 1957,
7.
119. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 42, 214–15.
120. Interview with Jeff Okun, 23 March 2012, Hollywood, CA.
121. Rudolf Arnheim, Art and Visual Perception: A Psychology of the Creative Eye
(Berkeley: University of California Press, 1967), 167.

2. Film Titles: Theory and Practice
1. Bass was probably involved in the credits for The Taking of Pelham 1-2-3
(1974) but did not receive credit, and he certainly contributed to the credits for The
Human Factor (1979), which uses elements from Bass’s poster for the film.
2. See Army Archerd, “Just for Variety,” Daily Variety, 15 February 1966, 2;
“Ray, Wilson to Film ‘The Alien’ for Col.,” Daily Variety, 12 June 1967, 1.
3. Interview with Jeff Okun, 6 June 2011, Studio City, CA.
4. Interview with Mike Lonzo, 20 September 2012, Hollywood, CA.
5. Interview with Saul Bass, KTTY Channel 11 Los Angeles, 27 November 1977,
Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
6. Saloment Cort, “‘The Compleat Filmmaker’—From Title to Features,” American Cinematographer 58, no. 3 (March 1977): 289.
7. American Film Institute Seminar, 3.
8. For example, see Hazel Flynn, “Something Wild Is Strange Enigma,” Los Angeles Citizen News, 18 May 1962, clipping files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.

378

Notes to Pages 72–75
Flynn wrote: “The main titles are by Saul Bass and they are the most original item
about the whole production.”
9. Mike Fessier Jr., “Lay ’Em in the Aisles with a Title,” Daily Variety, 27 October 1964, 39. Bass continued to design posters and other graphic materials for Wilder.
10. “Movies: Man with a Golden Arm,” Time, 16 March 1962, 46.
11. Ken Coupland, “Saul Bass: The Name behind the Titles,” Graphis 54, no. 316
(July–August 1998): 104.
12. Michaela Williams, “Satire of a World Premiere,” Chicago, 13 November
1965, The Searching Eye reviews, box 10A, file 44, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
13. “Do Film Critics Extol ‘Bass Credits’ to Slur (by Contrast) the Director?”
Variety, 17 June 1964, 5.
14. Arnold Schwartzman, “Saul Bass: Anatomy of a Mentor,” Baseline International Typographics Journal 22 (1996): 21.
15. As Time magazine noted as early as 1962: “At 41 Bass is easily the highest
priced man in his field.” “Movies: Man with a Golden Arm,” 46.
16. The Margaret Herrick Library’s Bass Collection contains budgets only from
films made in the 1980s and later.
17. Letter from Saul Bass to Tom Andre (Anthony-Worldwide production manager), 11 June 1957, Gregory Peck Papers, Margaret Herrick Library Special Collections, AMPAS.
18. Lowell A. Bodger, “A Modern Approach to Film Titling,” American Cinematographer 40, no. 8 (August 1960): 477.
19. See, for example, memo from Al Tamarin to Myer P. Beck, “Advertising and
Publicity Budget,” 10 December 1956, box 14, Stanley Kramer Papers, UCLA
Library Special Collections.
20. Rebello, Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho, 100.
21. Henry Wolf cited a figure of $50,000 for Spartacus. See Henry Wolf, “Saul
Bass: Some Short Takes on a Long Friendship” (unpublished manuscript on Henry
Wolf stationery), box 39A, file 41, “Henry Wolf,” Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS. See also Bodger, “Modern Approach to Film Titling,” 477; Fessier,
“Lay ’Em in the Aisles,” 39; A. D. Murphy, “Only a Pittance for Pix Titling,” Daily
Variety, 31 October 1967, 46.
22. “Pix Owe Much to Credits. Opening Runoff Now Getting Lotsa Flair, Flash,
Mood-Setting Motifs,” Variety, 11 September 1957, 7, 19.
23. Fred Foster, “New Look in Film Titles,” American Cinematographer 43, no.
6 (June 1962): 357, quoted in Jason Gendler, “Saul Bass and Title Design: Intention
and Reception, and Production Integration” (paper presented at Society of Cinema
and Media Studies Conference, Los Angeles, March 2010).
24. Vincent Canby, “Panic: An Industry Staple,” Variety, 21 September 1960, 4.
25. Pauline Kael, “Fantasies of the Art House Audience,” Sight & Sound 31, no.
1 (Winter 1961–1962): 8.
26. Joseph Mathewson, “Titles Are Better than Ever,” New York Times, 16 July
1967.

379

Notes to Pages 75–79
27. Coupland, “Saul Bass: Man behind the Titles,” 104.
28. See Jean Firstenberg, “From the Director’s Chair: Credit Where Credit Is
Due,” American Film 9, no. 6 (April 1984): 80.
29. Cort, “‘The Compleat Filmmaker,’” 291.
30. That’s Entertainment II file, box 13A, file 30, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
31. Interview with Saul Bass (CSULB, 1986).
32. Mary Glucksman, “Saul Bass: Due Credit,” Screen International, 13 May
1994, 28.
33. Cort, “‘The Compleat Filmmaker,’” 290.
34. “Saul Bass [Interview],” Designer Magazine, May 1980, 24.
35. Jack Haley’s That’s Entertainment! (1974) used no fewer than eleven different
narrators, including Astaire, Kelly, Bing Crosby, Frank Sinatra, and Elizabeth Taylor.
36. This whole sequence was originally planned to come at the end of the titles,
after the head title. See That’s Entertainment II file, box 13A, file 29, Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
37. The Bass estate possesses a complete set of storyboards for A River Runs
through It, which envisioned a montage of images and crosscutting between shots of
the river, a desk with family photographs, and various homemade flies on the desktop.
Much of this was reworked in the early titles before the sequence transitions to historical photographs of the town. See A River Runs through It file, box 26, folder 498,
Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. The long tracking shots along a
nineteenth-century desk holding books, portraits, and artificial flies survive as 35mm
rushes in the Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
38. Laszlo Moholy-Nagy, The New Vision (Mineola, NY: Dover Publications,
2005), 46.
39. For an early example of this style of head title, see Her Man (1930), cited in
Deborah Allison, “Beyond Saul Bass: A Century of American Film Title Sequences,”
Film International, 30 January 2011, http://filmint.nu/?p=202.
40. Originally, Donald O’Connor’s name was supposed to appear on the gong.
See That’s Entertainment II file.
41. See George Stanitzek, “Vorspann (Titles/Credits, Générique),” in Das Buch
zum Vorspann, ed. Alexander Böhnke, Rembrent Hüser, and Georg Stanitzek (Berlin:
Vorwerk, 2006), 14. For the English translation, see George Stanitzek, “Reading the
Title Sequence (Vorspann, Générique),” Cinema Journal 48, no. 4 (Summer 2009):
44–58.
42. Charles Michener with Martin Kasindorf, “Old Movies Come Alive,” Newsweek, 31 May 1976, 48.
43. Gordon Cow, Films and Filming, August 1976, 39. See also Stephan Farber,
New West, 24 May 1976, 97; Penelope Gilliat, New Yorker, 24 May 1976, 134; Vincent Canby, New York Times, 17 May 1976, 40; Hollis Alpert, Saturday Review, 29
May 1976, 46.
44. Quoted in Pamela Haskin, “Saul, Can You Make Me a Title?” Film Quarterly
50, no. 1 (Fall 1996).

380

Notes to Pages 79–86
45. Merle Armitage, “Movie Titles,” Print 5, no. 2 (1947): 44.
46. Joanne Stang, “Movie (Title) Mogul,” New York Times, 1 December 1957, D1.
47. Fessier, “Lay ’Em in the Aisles,” 39.
48. “Saul Bass,” short segment, American Movie Classics Channel, 1994.
49. David Bordwell, Janet Staiger, and Kristin Thompson, The Classical Hollywood
Cinema: Film Style & Mode of Production to 1960 (New York: Columbia University
Press, 1985), 25.
50. Bodger, “Modern Approach to Film Titling,” 476.
51. See “Pix Owe Much to Credits,” 7; Fred Hift, “And that Cramps Film Ads—
Bass,” Variety, 20 November 1957, 7, 24.
52. Quoted in Jaan Uhelszki, “Film: The Art of Motion Graphics in Film,” Soma
18, no. 7 (September 2004): 86.
53. Grant Tume, “Design for Living,” Detour Magazine, March 1996, 32.
54. André Gardies, “Am Anfang war der Vorspann,” in Böhnke et al., Das Buch
zum Vorspann, 21.
55. The Chop Suey Alphabet font was designed by Ross F. George in 1935. See
Harris, “Extra Credits,” 134.
56. Thierry Kuntzel, “Die Filmarbeit, 2,” Montage/AV 8, no. 1 (1999): 25–84.
57. Bordwell, Staiger, and Thompson, Classical Hollywood Cinema, 25.
58. Tom Conley, Film Hieroglyphs: Ruptures in Classical Cinema (Minneapolis:
University of Minnesota Press, 1991), ix.
59. Gardies, “Am Anfang war der Vorspann,” 27.
60. Conley, Film Hieroglyphs, ix.
61. See “The True Story behind MGM’s Main Title Design,” http://www.mgmmovie-titles-and-credits.com/main-title-design.html.
62. See Deborah Allison, “Promises in the Dark: Opening Title Sequences in
American Feature Films of the Sound Period” (PhD diss., University of East Anglia,
2002); Harris, “Extra Credits”; and Gemma Solana and Antonio Boneu, Uncredited:
Graphic Design & Opening Titles in Movies (Amsterdam: BIS Publishers, 2007).
63. Pat Kirkham, “Reassessing the Saul Bass and Alfred Hitchcock Collaboration,”
West 86th 18, no. 1 (Spring 2011), http://www.west86th.bgc.bard.edu/articles/
kirkham-bass-hitchcock.html.
64. Peter Hall, “Opening Ceremonies: Typography and the Movies, 1955–1969,”
in Architecture and Film, ed. Mark Lamster (New York: Princeton Architectural Press,
2000), 129.
65. Coupland, “Saul Bass: Man behind the Titles,” 103.
66. Solana and Boneu, Uncredited, 13.
67. Allison, “Beyond Saul Bass.”
68. Peter Decherney even argues that duping was part of the early industry’s business model. See Peter Decherney, Hollywood’s Copyright Wars: From Edison to the
Internet (New York: Columbia University Press, 2012).
69. Julia May, “The Art of Film Title Design throughout Cinema History,” Smashing Magazine, 4 October 2010, http://www.smashingmagazine.com/2010/10/04/
the-art-of-the-film-title-throughout-cinema-history/. See also Yael Braha and Bill

381

Notes to Pages 86–93
Byrne, Creative Motion Graphic Titling for Film, Video, & the Web (London: Focal
Press, 2011), 47.
70. Bordwell, Staiger, and Thompson, Classical Hollywood Cinema, 26.
71. Adam Duncan Harris, “Das goldene Zeitalter de Filvorspanns: Die Geschichte
der Pacific Title and Art Studios,” in Böhnke et al., Das Buch zum Vorspann, 123. See
also Harris, “Extra Credits.”
72. Allison, “Beyond Saul Bass.”
73. See http://www.shillpages.com/movies/index2.shtml.
74. Armitage, “Movie Titles,” 43.
75. Allison, “Beyond Saul Bass.”
76. Deborah Allison, “Innovative Vorspanne und Reflexivität im klassischen Holllywoodkino,” in Böhnke et al., Das Buch zum Vorspann, 94–101.
77. Everett Aison, “The Current Scene: Film Titles,” Print 19, no. 4 (July–August
1965): 29.
78. Ibid.
79. Saul Bass, “Film Titles—A New Field for the Graphic Designer,” Graphis 16,
no. 89 (May–June 1960): 209.
80. Harris, “Das goldene Zeitalter de Filvorspanns,” 126.
81. Braha and Byrne, Creative Motion Graphic Titling, 48.
82. Angela Aleiss, “The Names behind the Titles,” Variety, 8 December 1997, 86.
83. Ibid., 56.
84. David Geffner, “First Things First,” Filmmaker Magazine 6, no. 1 (Fall 1997),
http://www.filmmakermagazine.com/issues/fa111997/firstthingsfirst.php.
85. Ellen Lupton and J. Abbott Miller, Designs Writing Research: Writing on
Graphic Design (New York: Princeton Architectural Press, 1996), 5.
86. Interview with Saul Bass (CSULB, 1986).
87. Paul Rand, Design Form and Chaos (New Haven, CT: Yale University Press,
1993), 3.
88. Peter Bil’ak, “In Search of a Comprehensive Type Design Theory,” Typotheque
.com,http:/wwtypotheque.com/articles/in_search_of_a_comprehensive_type_
design_theory.
89. Lupton and Miller, Designs Writing Research, 62.
90. Robert Bringhurst, The Elements of Typographic Style, 3rd ed. (Vancouver:
Hartley and Marks, 2005), 19.
91. Ibid., 20–24.
92. Jim Supanick, “Saul Bass: To Hit the Ground Running . . . ,” Film Comment
33, no. 2 (March–April 1997): 73.
93. Memo from Morrie Marsh to Saul Bass, 9 March 1973, “Bass on Titles” box,
Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. See also Title Reel memo, 3
October 1968, ibid.
94. Memo from Saul Bass to Morrie Marsh, Re: Dave Adams distributed Title
Reel, 6 January 1972, “Bass on Titles” box, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.See also memo, Pyramid Films, 10 May 1977.
95. Okun interview, 2011.

382

Notes to Pages 93–104
96. “Gleanings from a Gondola,” Variety, 8 September 1982, 7.
97. Review of Bass on Titles, EFLA (1978): 10, 109.
98. Kimberly Elam, Expressive Typography: The Word as Image (New York: Van
Nostrand Reinhold, 1990), 1.
99. John R. Biggs, Basic Typography (London: Faber and Faber, 1968), 15.
100. Elam, Expressive Typography, 32.
101. Ibid., 31.
102. Biggs, Basic Typography, 40.
103. Dawn Ades, “Function and Abstraction in Poster Design,” in The 20th Century Poster: Design of the Avant-Garde (New York: Abbeville Press, 1984), 61.
104. Martin Solomon, The Art of Typography: An Introduction to typo.icon.ography
(New York: Watson-Guptill, 1986), 148.
105. I’m referring not to typographic color here, which indicates the intensity of the
type as set en masse, but to its conventional usage. Michael Beaumont, Type: Design,
Color, Character & Use (Cincinnati, OH: Northern Lights Books, 1987), 78.
106. Alan Casty, The Dramatic Art of the Film (New York: Harper and Row, 1971),
57. See also James Monaco, How to Read a Film: The Art, Technology, Language, History and Theory of Film and Media (New York: Oxford University Press, 1977), 86.
107. Kepes, Language of Vision, 54, critiqued the golden mean because he saw it as
an absolute value that was supposedly based on nature; this hindered the free expression of dynamic rhythm on the page—a rhythm based on sensory relationships rather
than mathematics. Bass also had little use for the golden mean. See Bell, “Oral History
with Saul Bass,” 38.
108. Philip B. Meggs, A History of Graphic Design (New York: Van Nostrand Reinhold, 1983), 379.
109. Bringhurst, Elements of Typographic Style, 23.
110. Meggs, History of Graphic Design, 380.
111. Solomon, Art of Typography, 15, 42.
112. Rebello, Hitchcock and the Making of Psycho, 57, 100–101. Bass asked for and
got three 16mm prints of the Psycho titles for his personal archive. This must have
become standard practice for Bass & Associates, because the estate collection includes
16mm titles for most of Bass’s films.
113. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 404n87.
114. Psycho file, box 6A, file 33, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
Bass’s published description of the titles is slightly shorter.
115. Raymond Durgnat, A Long Hard Look at “Psycho” (London: BFI Publishing,
2002), 20.
116. James Counts, “Just the Beginning: The Art of Film Titles,” http://www
.twenty4.co.uk/03-articles/ArtofFilmTitles/main.htm (no longer available). I’m
grateful to Melissa Dollman, who pointed me to this source in her unpublished paper
“Moving Words” (UCLA, 2005).
117. Hitchcock had previously used an image of venetian blinds being raised and
lowered behind the credits for Rear Window (1953), which also addresses the issue of
voyeurism.

383

Notes to Pages 105–112
118. Higher Learning file, box 4A, file 2, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS. The file also includes a diagonal grid drawn in pencil on cardboard.
119. Ibid., box 3A, files 39, 40, 41. The production had a budget of $40,000, but
it actually cost only $25,357. The design firm received $30,000, payable in installments at contract signing, approval of final design, and completion.
120. Ibid.
121. Ibid.
122. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, vi.
123. Martin Scorsese, “Saul Bass 1920–1996: A Celebration of an Extraordinary
Life” (unpublished manuscript, 1996), quoted in Kirkham, “Reassessing the Saul Bass
and Alfred Hitchcock Collaboration.”
124. Coupland, “Saul Bass: Man behind the Titles,” 105.
125. Martin Scorsese, interview by the British Film Institute, 11 February 1993,
VHS tape, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
126. Timmer, “Making the Ordinary Extraordinary,” 121.
127. Goodfellas file, box 3A, file 37, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
128. Ben Brantley noted in his film review: “From its opening credits, which whizz
off the screen like souped-up getaway cars, Martin Scorsese’s Goodfellas stays in
breathlessly high gear.” Elle, November 1990, clipping in Goodfellas production file,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
129. Josh Wolski, “Goodfellas, Not Coming to a Theater Near You,” 8 August
2005, http://notcoming.com/saulbass/caps_goodfellas.php.
130. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 271.
131. Ibid.
132. Bass described his titles for Saint Joan as follows: “The title opens with bell
symbols, in the form of bell clappers, swinging back and forth across the screen. They
swing and advance towards the viewer and fade as they enlarge to screen-filling size.
In the interim, new clappers emerge from the background and swing across the
screen. They too advance and grow in size. This process is repeated throughout the
title as the credits appear and disappear. However, the general effect is one of the
screen filling more and more with the ethereal, swinging bell symbols, until finally a
few white clappers are introduced, one of which advances and dominates the entire
screen. At the apex of this clapper’s forward movement the symbol for the film (a figure holding a broken sword) materializes within it, followed by the final credit.”
“Saint Joan titles description,” box 10A, file 25, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
133. Tom Eckersley, Poster Design (London: Studio Publications, 1954), 35.
134. Joanne Stang, “Movie (Title) Mogul,” New York Times, 1 December 1957, 86.
135. “Behind the Title,” Newsweek, 20 January 1958, 89–90, box 1A, file 46, Saul
Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
136. Gene Moskowitz, “Bonjour Tristesse,” Variety, 15 January 1958, 6.
137. “Titles Description,” box 2A, file 48, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS, first published in Bass, “Film Titles,” 209.

384

Notes to Pages 113–121
138. Josh Wolski, “Bonjour Tristesse, Not Coming to a Theater Near You,” 8 August
2005, http://notcoming.com/saulbass/caps_bonjourtristesse.php.
139. Memo from Myer P. Beck to Stanley Kramer, 18 December 1956, box 14,
Publicity folder, Stanley Kramer Papers, Collection 161, UCLA Library Special
Collections.
140. Memo from Al Tamarin to Myer P. Beck, “Advertising and Publicity Budget,”
10 December 1956, box 14, Stanley Kramer Papers, UCLA Library Special
Collections.
141. The Pride and the Passion, box 6A, file 27, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
142. See Mark Vallen, Art for a Change blog, http://art-for-a-change.com/
blog/2010/06/goya-los-caprichos-in-los-angeles.html.
143. See The Pride and the Passion production file at the Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS, reproduced in part in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 170.
144. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 163, 191.
145. See the original trailer at http://www.tcm.com/mediaroom/video/196871/
Pride-and-The-Passion-The-Original-Trailer.html. Fredenthal’s sketches were also
published in Life magazine and the exhibitors’ manual, and they were available for
purchase through the National Screen Service. Fredenthal (1914–1958) was a wellknown American watercolorist and illustrator (e.g., he illustrated the novel Tobacco
Road). The trailer cost $7,500, according to the publicity budget for the film. See
memo from Al Tamarin to David V. Picker, “Overall Campaign,” 8 February 1957,
box 14, “The Pride and the Passion” production files, Stanley Kramer Papers, UCLA
Library Special Collections.
146. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 397n10.
147. Bass, “Film Titles,” 209. The article reproduced thirty-six color frames from
the film.
148. “Behind the Title,” Newsweek, 20 January 1958, 90.
149. Art Cohn, Michael Todd’s Around the World in 80 Days Almanac (New York:
Random House, 1956), 11–16.
150. Strictly speaking, the Oxford English Dictionary traces the etymology of cameo’s meaning as “a bit part in a film” to a 1950 novel by Edmund Crispin. Todd was
apparently the first to use the term to denote major stars in walk-on parts, although
this has yet to be accepted by the OED.
151. See Morgenstern, “Saul Bass,” 44.
152. “Bass Obtains Release from ‘80’ Ad Chore,” Daily Variety, 19 July 1956, 2.
153. Richard Warren Lewis, “Box Office Bait by Bass: A Designer Masters the Fine
Art of Hooking an Audience,” Show Business Illustrated, 23 January 1962, 50.
154. Jack Harrison, “Around the World in 80 Days,” Hollywood Reporter, 18 October 1956, 3. See also Fred Hift, “Around the World in 80 Days,” Variety, 24 October
1956, 6; Sherwin Kane, Motion Picture Daily, 18 October 1956, 6.
155. D. R., “Around the World in Eighty Days,” Monthly Film Bulletin 24 (1957):
94.
156. Hollis Alpert, “What Goes on Here,” Woman’s Day, March 1961.

385

Notes to Pages 121–126
157. See, for example, http://filmfanatic.org/reviews/?p=15567; http://www
.afilmcanon.com/journal/2009/6/20/anderson-around-the-world-in-eightydays-1956.html.
158. “Suit Charges Todd ‘Pirated’ Epilog for ‘80,’” Daily Variety, 28 December
1956, 2.
159. “Saul Bass Answers ‘Plagiarism’ Charge with Suit for 600G,” Daily Variety, 18
January 1957, 2.
160. “250G ‘80 Days’ Suit over Epilog Settled,” Daily Variety, 8 July 1958, 3.
161. Noell Wolfram Evans, “Saul Bass: A Film Title Pioneer,” http://www
.digitalmediafx.com/Features/saulbass.html.
162. Reprinted in Georgine Oeri, “Saul Bass,” Graphis 11, no. 59 (1955): 260.
163. Gerard Blanchard, “Saul Bass: Génériques et Languages,” Communications et
Languages 40 (1978): 78, 80.
164. A document in the production file, “Credit Provisions,” contains five pages of
notes on specifications for text size and billing for the actors’ credits. See Gunther
Schiff to Stanley Kramer, 21 January 1963, box 62, “It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad
World,” Stanley Kramer Papers, UCLA Library Special Collections.
165. It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World reviews file, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
166. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 41–42.
167. See http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/It%27s_a_Mad,_Mad,_Mad,_Mad_World.
168. The high costs of making three-camera, wide-screen films led the Cinerama
company to stop production of its original system after the release of How the West Was
Won (1962). Cinerama continued the brand with Ultra Panavision 70, which used
anamorphic lenses to project onto the curved screen. It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad
World was the first single-camera Cinerama film. See http://www.widescreenmuseum.
com/widescreen/wingup2.htm.
169. Bob Allen, “Designing and Producing the Credit Titles for ‘It’s a Mad, Mad,
Mad, Mad World,’” American Cinematographer 44, no. 12 (December 1963): 706–
7. The same color scheme as a monochromatic background strongly suggests that
Bass created the last twenty seconds of the It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World trailer,
where the title appears word by word as the title song is heard. See http://www
.youtube.com/watch?v=Sla845GW9YM.
170. It is also odd that Stanley Kramer, who worked with Bass on numerous projects over a fifteen-year period, never mentions the designer in his autobiography. See
Stanley Kramer with Thomas M. Coffey, A Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World: A Life in
Hollywood (New York: Harcourt, Brace, 1997). Bass is also missing from Donald
Spoto, Stanley Kramer: A Life (New York: Putnam, 1978).
171. Philip K. Scheuer, “‘It’s a Mad World Challenge to Sanity,” Los Angeles Times,
5 November 1963, pt. 4, 11.
172. Tube, “It’s a Mad, Mad, Mad, Mad World,” Daily Variety, 5 November 1963,
5.
173. Gene Arngel, “Mad Money Millions for Kramer and UA,” Film Daily, 5
August 1965, 1, 5. See also memo from Leon Goldberg to Arthur Krim, 11 May

386

Notes to Pages 126–134
1966, Re: Stanley Kramer Pictures, box 127, folder “Sale Correspondence MW,” Collection 161, Stanley Kramer Papers, UCLA Library Special Collections.
174. Allen, “Designing and Producing the Credit Titles,” 707. Normally, theatrical
curtains rose in four or five seconds.

3. Creating a Mood: Pars pro toto
1. Morella, Epstein, and Clark, Those Great Movie Ads, 44.
2. Harris, “Extra Credits,” 227.
3. Fred Hift, “And that Cramps Film Ads—Bass,” Variety, 20 November 1957,
24.
4. AT&T Corporate Program (1969), 16mm film, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS. A New Look for the Bell System is the Academy’s title for
the film.
5. Morella, Epstein, and Clark, Those Great Movie Ads, 44.
6. Foster Hirsch, Otto Preminger: The Man Who Would Be King (New York:
Alfred A. Knopf, 2007), 195–96.
7. Otto Preminger, An Autobiography (New York: Doubleday, 1977), 109. See
also Hirsch, Otto Preminger, 196. There is some controversy about whether Preminger is remembering the story correctly. Bass denied working on The Moon Is Blue.
See Bell, “Oral History with Saul Bass,” 67. Andreas A. Timmer quotes Bass’s assistant, Brad Roberts, who said Bass designed the birds for the VHS release of the film
in 1980. See Timmer, “Making the Ordinary Extraordinary,” 134n4.
8. “Chatter,” Variety, 9 December 1955, 11.
9. “Chatter,” Variety, 13 December 1955, 9.
10. See Bass on Titles. See also Hirsch, Otto Preminger, 244. Bass and Kirkham,
Saul Bass, 398, includes a photo of the Fox Wilshire marquee in Los Angeles, showing
only the symbol for Exodus.
11. See Saul Bass interview, Man with the Golden Arm, typed transcript, box 4A,
file 21, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS; Hirsch, Otto Preminger,
242.
12. See Robert M. Wendlinger, “Strong ‘Arm’ Methods: Roger Lewis of UA Discussed Unusual Ad Campaign for ‘Golden Arm,’” Hollywood Reporter, 1955, in box
4A, file 21, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS; “Saul Bass,” short
segment, American Movie Classics Channel, 1994.
13. “The Man with the Golden Arm,” Hollywood Reporter, 27 December 1955,
5–11.
14. Robert J. Landry, “Anatomy of a Campaign,” Variety, 10 June 1959, 7.
15. See the trailer at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=YljTxWFTtCk.
16. Art Goodman drew the Advise and Consent poster, but it was Bass’s idea. Bass
said the film would blow the lid off Washington, leading Goodman to suggest opening up the dome of the Capitol. Interview with Mike Lonzo, 20 September 2012.
17. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 149.
18. Bell, “Oral History with Saul Bass,” 44.
19. King, “Taking Credit,” http://www.typotheque.com/articles/taking_credit_

387

Notes to Pages 134–138
film_title_sequences_1955–1965_6_musical_statues_spartacus_1960. See Bass and
Kirkham, Saul Bass, 192.
20. Hift, “And that Cramps Film Ads—Bass,” 24.
21. Ibid.
22. Morella, Epstein, and Clark, Those Great Movie Ads, 109.
23. “Bureau of Missing Business,” Variety, 20 August 1958, 12.
24. Ervine Metzl, The Poster: Its History and Its Art (New York: Watson-Guptill,
1963), 18.
25. John Barnicoat, Posters: A Concise History (London: Thames and Hudson,
1985), 7.
26. Maurice Rickards, The Rise and Fall of the Poster (New York: McGraw-Hill,
1971), 20.
27. Epes Winthrop Sargent, “Ten Years of Film Advertising,” Moving Picture
World 31, no. 10 (10 March 1917): 1489.
28. Steve Schapiro and David Chierichetti, The Movie Poster Book (New York: E. P.
Dutton, 1979), 9.
29. Universal Film Manufacturing Company advertisement in Moving Picture
World 19, no. 8 (21 February 1914): 909.
30. Sargent, “Ten Years of Film Advertising,” 1489.
31. See Epes Winthrop Sargent, “Advertising for Exhibitors,” Moving Picture
World 11, no. 10 (9 March 1912): 860; “The Question of Posters,” Moving Picture
World 12, no. 3 (20 April 1912): 205; Abraham Nelson, “Posters Cause Comment,”
Moving Picture World 25, no. 5 (31 July 1915): 856.
32. J. B. Clymer, “Posters, Pertinent and Impertinent,” Moving Picture World 14,
no. 8 (23 November 1912): 778; W. Stephen Bush, “New Lights on Posters,” Moving Picture World 28, no. 5 (29 April 1916): 777.
33. “New ‘Pearl White’ Poster,” Moving Picture World 14, no. 12 (12 December
1912): 1179.
34. “Paramount’s Convertibles,” Moving Picture World 36, no. 9 (1 June 1918):
1282.
35. “History of the Movies and the Movie Poster,” http://www.fffmovieposters
.com/movieposterhistory.php.
36. Schapiro and Chierichetti, Movie Poster Book, 14. See also Gregory J. Edwards,
The International Film Poster (Salem, NH: Salem House, 1985), 68–69; Edwin Poole
and Susan Poole, Learn about Movie Posters (Chattanooga, TN: iGuide Media, 2002),
310–14.
37. Eugene A. Hosanksy, “The Current Scene: Film Posters,” Print 19, no. 4
(July–August 1965): 22.
38. Bruce Hershenson, “A History of Movie Posters,” http://www.reelclassics
.com/Articles/General/posters-article.htm.
39. Stephen Rebello and Richard Allen, Reel Art: Great Posters from the Golden
Age of the Silver Screen (New York: Abbeville Press, 1988), 118.
40. “Carmen Jones Art,” in 34th Annual of Advertising and Editorial Art and
Design (New York: Longmans, Green in association with Art Directors Club of New

388

Notes to Pages 139–143
York, 1955), n.p. [303]. See also Judith Salavetz, Spencer Drate, and Sam Sarowitz,
eds., Art of the Modern Movie Poster: International Postwar Style and Design (San
Francisco: Chronicle Books, 2008), 440, which names Carmen Jones as Bass’s first
poster design. Kallis and Bass won an Art Directors Club Award for a Quanta Airlines
advertisement in 1956. See 35th Annual of Advertising and Editorial Art and Design
(New York: Longmans, Green, 1956), n.p. [no. 60].
41. Edwards, International Film Poster, 73.
42. Hosanksy, “Current Scene,” 20.
43. Toot Buj, “Buy American,” Film Comment 44, no. 3 (May–June 2008):
20. Williams argues the same point in reference to Bass’s title designs. See David
E. Williams, “Initial Images,” American Cinematographer 79, no. 5 (May 1998):
92.
44. Salavetz, Drate, and Sarowitz, Art of the Modern Movie Poster, 440.
45. The poster design of silhouettes was also used for other materials, including
the premiere invitation and billboards. What convinced me that Bass must have
designed the poster is the fact that a whole campaign was organized around the image;
in addition, the design for United Artists’ press releases includes a square image of a
map of Nuremberg (red and black) split into fifteen fragments, a design feature seen
in many Bass designs, including the end titles for The Big Knife and Four Just Men. See
Judgment at Nuremberg press releases, box 38, folder “Publicity Jan,” Collection 161,
Stanley Kramer Papers, UCLA Special Collections.
46. It has been argued that Bass did not design the poster for West Side Story. See
Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 107.
47. Some Bass one-sheet posters now sell for more than $1,000: a very good
quality Vertigo poster was sold at auction in 2011 for more than $4,900, The Man with
the Golden Arm sold for $1,500 in April 2012, and Anatomy of a Murder went for
$2,400 in 2010. See the auction history site at eMovieposter.com, http://www
.emovieposter.com/agaller y/search/film%253A%2520VERTIGO%2520%
28%2758%29/archive.html.
48. Quoted in Hosansky, “Current Scene,” 20.
49. Armin Hofmann, “Thoughts on the Poster,” in The 20th Century Poster:
Design of the Avant-Garde, ed. Dawn Ades (New York: Abbeville Press, 1984), 91.
50. The artist for The Big Country was Morton Dimondstein. See AIGA Archives,
http://designarchives.aiga.org/#/entries/Saul%20Bass/_/detail/relevance/
asc/34/7/16212/big-country/1.
51. Quoted in Selden Rodman, Conversations with Artists (New York: DevinAdair, 1957); later published in “Notes from a Conversation with Selden Rodman,
1956,” in Writings on Art: Mark Rothko, ed. Miguel López-Remiro (New Haven,
CT: Yale University Press, 2006).
52. See Lynn Spigel, TV by Design: Modern Art and the Rise of Network Television
(Chicago: University of Chicago Press, 2008), 52.
53. “The West Coast: A Designer’s View,” Industrial Design 4, no. 10 (October
1957): 129.
54. Phyllis Tanner and Maury Nemoy are credited as artists on the poster. See

389

Notes to Pages 144–152
AIGA Archive, http://designarchives.aiga.org/#/entries/Saul%20Bass/_/detail/
relevance/asc/50/7/17655/the-man-with-the-golden-arm/1.
55. See 37th Annual of Advertising and Editorial Art and Design (New York:
Longmans, Green, 1958), n.p. [nos. 64, 65], which lists Saul Bass and Henry Markowitz as the artists. The same source credits Goodman and Bass for the Love in the
Afternoon poster.
56. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 128; http://www.moviepostershop.com/
bonjour-tristesse-movie-poster-1958. The actual one-sheet poster in the author’s
possession confirms that the reproduction in Bass and Kirkham is accurate.
57. The last 40 seconds of the 1:36-minute trailer features the face in blue and
pink, as the credits silently pop in and out; it ends with the message: “Next Attraction
in This Theater” in the Bass type for Tristesse. Previously, the trailer showed several
scenes without comment. https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Z-RCRulvXgQ .
58. As Martin Scorsese notes in reference to Bonjour Tristesse’s logo: “This suggests Modigliani and Matisse but also recalls haute couture and the sophisticated
advertising design of the time.” Martin Scorsese, “Anatomy of a Synthesist,” New
York Times Magazine, 29 December 1996, 44.
59. “Porgy and Bess, Unused Production Elements,” 16mm, color reversal, 4:45
minutes, 16778-2-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
60. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 165.
61. See Stanley Wolpert, Nine Hours to Rama (New York: Random House Books,
1962).
62. Steven Heller, “The Man with the Big Book Look,” Print 56, no. 2 (March–
April 2002): 48.
63. Hollywood Reporter, 16 January 1962, 3. See also Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass,
398.
64. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 148.
65. Stanley Wolpert, Nine Hours to Rama (New York: Bantam Books, 1963).
66. Metzl, The Poster, 170. Metzl’s prejudice against credits, expressed at least
twice in the text, is a bit odd, given his invocation that posters be both advertising and
art.
67. Purchased from the Bass estate by Jim Northover, the posters for Grand Prix,
Exodus, and The Fixer were among those exhibited. See http://www.oipolloi.com/
bass-notes-the-film-posters-of-saul-bass.
68. “Preminger Picture Nearly Flawless,” Hollywood Reporter, 14 December 1955,
3. See also “Man with the Golden Arm,” Motion Picture Herald, 17 December 1955,
706.
69. Quoted in Leo Goldsmith, “The Man with the Golden Arm, Not Coming to a
Theatre Near You,” 2005, http://www.notcoming.com/saulbass/caps_manwgoldenarm
.php.
70. Harris, “Extra Credits,” 228.
71. Wendlinger, “Strong ‘Arm’ Methods.”
72. “Man with the Golden Arm,” box 4A, file 27, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.

390

Notes to Pages 152–161
73. For example, five MPAA companies abstained from voting on the film. See
W. R. Wilkerson, “Trade Views,” Hollywood Reporter, 9 December 1955, 1. Meanwhile, a second scene of Sinatra preparing heroin with a spoon and matches was cut to
appease with New York State censor. See “Preminger Voluntarily Cuts Scene from
‘Arm,’” Variety, 14 December 1955, 37. See also “L.A. Radio Stations Refuse to Air
Spot Plugs for ‘Man with Golden Arm,’” Daily Variety, 19 December 1955, 9. Finally,
the Legion of Decency gave the film a B rating. See “Legion ‘B’-Rates Preminger Pic,
Denied Seal,” Variety, 28 December 1955, 13.
74. “The Man with the Golden Arm,” typed manuscript, n.d., box 4A, file 19, Saul
Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
75. Jack Moffitt, review of Man with the Golden Arm, Hollywood Reporter, 14
December 1955, 3. Gene Moskowitz wrote: “Novel titles have been produced by Saul
Bass.” See his film review in Variety, 14 December 1955, 6.
76. Jan-Christopher Horak, Lovers of Cinema: The First American Film AvantGarde (Madison: University of Wisconsin Press, 1995), 35–36.
77. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 66.
78. Ibid., 55.
79. Hirsch, Otto Preminger, 219.
80. “Pickford to Star in The Library,” Variety, 21 November 1951. See also “Mary
Pickford Hops out of Stan Kramer’s ‘Fire’ Because It Isn’t Tinted,” Variety, 19 September 1952, 1; Hollywood Reporter, 25 September 1952, 1.
81. See “Polishing Library,” Daily Variety, 1 June 1955, 8; “Upcoming Pic, ‘The
Library’ to Sneer at Book-Burners’ Fear of Ideas,” Variety, 6 July 1955, 1.
82. “Legion of Decency ‘Separately’ Classifies Col’s STORM CENTER,” Daily
Variety, 10 July 1956, 1.
83. “Inside Stuff—Pictures,” Variety, 8 July 1959, 17.
84. Hirsch, Otto Preminger, 284–85. Uris’s novel remained on best-seller lists for
eighty weeks and sold 400,000 hardback and 3 million paperback copies.
85. There is some controversy about whether Otto Preminger or Kirk Douglas
broke the blacklist. Preminger first announced publicly in January 1960 that Trumbo
would receive credit for Exodus. Trumbo had earlier written the script for Spartacus,
under a pseudonym, but Douglas did not make a similar announcement until September 1960. Nevertheless, it was Douglas who received an award from the Writers Guild
for breaking the blacklist. See Hirsch, Otto Preminger, 327–28. Ceplair confirms that
Douglas overstated his case. See Larry Ceplair, “Kirk Douglas, Spartacus, and the
Blacklist,” Cineaste 37, no. 1 (Winter 2012): 11.
86. See “Add Preminger Pros & Cons,” Variety, 3 February 1960, 24; advertisement in Hollywood Reporter, 29 March 1960, 29, reprinted in Bass and Kirkham, Saul
Bass, 139.
87. See “Exodus Production Elements Unused Title Sequence,” 16mm, black and
white, 5812-2-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS. Images of the
surf would reappear in Preminger’s In Harm’s Way.
88. See Doug Bennett, “Military Stencil Typeface History,” http://www
.imagemaking.us/2011/10/military-stencil-typeface-history-by.html.

391

Notes to Pages 162–179
89. The trailer also ends with yellow flames engulfing the screen after the Exodus
logo appears in white and the title in pink on a blue background, reprising an earlier
title shot at the beginning of the trailer. See http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=gmcjfCQMKfA.
90. “Man with Gold Arm (Navy Rank), Plus Guts’ Cue to Prem’s World Sell,”
Variety, 31 March 1965, 13.
91. In Harm’s Way, “Script Covers,” box 4A, file 9, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
92. In Harm’s Way, “Titles Description,” box 4A, file 12, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
93. All quotes in this paragraph are from review sheet, “Cape Fear Storyboards for
Promotion,” box 2A, file 8, Saul Bass Collection, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
94. Thomas Krag and Tim Volsted, eds., Title Sequence Seminar: Saul and Elaine
Bass, 25 April 1995 (Copenhagen: National Film School of Denmark, 1995), 46.
95. The logo was used in the poster and on all advertising. Bass also designed an
elaborate press book for the campaign, which was made to look like a congressional
attaché case. The press book was included in my 2002 exhibition “Saul Bass—
Designer” at the Hollywood Entertainment Museum.
96. U.S. House of Representatives, Our Flag (Washington, DC: Government
Printing Office, 1989), http://www.usflag.org/colors.html.
97. See “Robson Adds ‘9 Hours’ to His 20th Slate,” Daily Variety, 3 October
1961, 1; Hollywood Reporter, 16 January 1962, 13.
98. James Powers, “Nine Hours to Rama,” Hollywood Reporter, 18 February 1963,
3; Harrison Carroll, “Nine Hours to Rama Powerful,” Los Angeles Herald Examiner,
9 May 1963; Philip K. Scheuer, “Gandhi Story Makes Powerful Screen Epic,” Los
Angeles Times Calendar, 3 March 1963, 3; Tube, “Nine Hours to Rama,” Variety, 20
February 1963, 6; Raymond Levy, “Nine Hours to Rama,” Motion Picture Herald, 6
March 1963, 762.
99. John Coleman, “Bass Relief,” New Statesman, 1 March 1963.
100. Interview with Jeff Okun, 6 June 2011, Studio City, CA. The biggest challenge was finding a bulk fabric that looked like a handkerchief.
101. Stuart Klawans, “Film,” Nation, 1 January 1990.
102. Jason Woloski, “Not Coming to a Theatre Near You,” http://www.notcoming
.com/saulbass/caps_warroses.php.
103. Quoted in John Naughton, “Credit Where Credit’s Due . . . ,” Empire 57
(March 1994): 54.
104. Quoted in Krag and Volsted, Title Sequence Seminar, 47.
105. “Shirley Thomas from Hollywood,” radio broadcast, 23 October 1955, 5:30
p.m., KFI-NBC, transcript in The Big Knife, “Publicity File,” box 1A, file 43, Saul
Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
106. Jean-Pierre Piton, Robert Aldrich (Paris: Edilig, 1985), 41.
107. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 35.
108. Allan Sekula, “The Body and the Archive,” in The Contest of Meaning: Critical
Histories of Photography, ed. Richard Bolton (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 1992), 343.

392

Notes to Pages 180–183
109. The play opened on 15 January 1952 and closed on 1 May 1952, after 161
performances. Universal supposedly paid six figures for the film rights. See Hollywood
Reporter, 23 February 1954, The Shrike production file, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
110. According to an unsubstantiated note on the Internet Movie Database
(IMDb), Bonner literally died onstage in July 1955, playing the same role at the Carthay Circle Theatre in Los Angeles, less than ten days after the film opened.
111. The Shrike (1955) publicity brochure, production files, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
112. Blogger “The Siren” argues that misogyny is at the very core of the film,
despite June Allyson’s strong performance. See http://selfstyledsiren.blogspot.com
/2012/01/shrike-1955.html.
113. A. H. Weiler, “The Shrike (1955) Tamed ‘Shrike’; Film Wife Less Deadly than
One in Play,” New York Times, 8 July 1955, http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/rev
iew?res=9D00E0DD103AE53BBC4053DFB166838E649EDE.
114. Murray Schumach, The Face on the Cutting Room Floor: The Story of Movie and
Television Censorship (New York: William Morrow, 1964).
115. David Badder, Bob Baker, and Markku Salmi, “Saul Bass,” Film Dope 3
(August 1973): 2.
116. The next Bass title on the list of the 250 greatest films of all time is Goodfellas,
at 171. See http://explore.bfi.org.uk/sightandsoundpolls/2012/critics/.
117. See Timmer, “Making the Ordinary Extraordinary,” 131n62. Timmer quotes
a letter from Bass to Herb Coleman, dated 26 February 1959, describing Whitney’s
work as well as the color timing of the sequence.
118. Tom Sito, Moving Innovations: A History of Computer Animation (Cambridge, MA: MIT Press, 2013), 26–28.
119. According to Emily King, Vertigo and Psycho were made with the help of
Harold Adler, who worked at National Screen Service (where The Seven Year Itch was
also produced). Adler comments on the precision of Bass’s storyboards but notes that
Bass needed help translating them to film, which may or may not have been true. See
King,“TakingCredit,” http://www.typothequecomarticlestaking_credit_film_
title_sequences_1955–1965_5_spiralling_aspirations_vertigo_1958.
120. Quoted in Pat Kirkham, “The Jeweller’s Eye,” Sight & Sound 7, no. 4 (April
1997): 18.
121. Donald Spoto, The Art of Alfred Hitchcock: Fifty Years of His Motion Pictures
(Garden City, NY: Dolphin Books, 1976), 299–300.
122. See Moholy-Nagy, New Vision (2005), 175.
123. Vertigo, “Title Description,” box 13A, file 39, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. Strangely, Bass insists that the opening shots of the title sequence
were in black and white before being tinted red. The original trailer for Vertigo also
employed the Lissajous light form, which appears immediately after a close-up of a dictionary definition of vertigo (almost matching Bass’s definition here), followed by
the film’s title shot. See the Vertigo trailer at https://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=Z5jvQwwHQNY.

393

Notes to Pages 183–192
124. Robin Wood, Hitchcock’s Films (New York: Paperback Library, 1970), 78.
125. Franz Roh and Jan Tschichold, Foto-Auge, Photo-Eye, Oeil et Photo (Stuttgart:
Akademischer Verlag GmbH., 1929).
126. Although John and Penelope Motimer received screen credit, the original
novel by Miriam Modell was adapted by Walter Newman, Charles Beaumont, Ira
Levin, Dalton Trumbo, and Arthur Kopit. See Hirsch, Otto Preminger,
400–401.
127. See “Bunny Lake Is Missing,” Daily Variety, 9 April 1965, 5. The ad reproduced the poster with a note to the left in Bass’s own hand: “Starts shooting in London today.”
128. See “Bunny Lake Is Missing,” Box Office, 18 October 1965; Robe, “Bunny
Lake Is Missing,” Daily Variety, 5 October 1965, 3, 10. The latter writes: “The simple
but effective titles by Saul Bass, will, as usual, carry over into the film’s entire advertising and promotion campaign.”
129. Bunny Lake Is Missing title description file, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
130. In Spartacus, the palm rather than the back of the hand is visible, but otherwise, the image is identical.
131. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 54.
132. Andrew Sarris, The American Cinema: Directors and Directions 1929–1968
(New York: E. P. Dutton, 1968), 106. See also Andrew Sarris, Confessions of a Cultist:
On the Cinema, 1955/1969 (London: Simon and Schuster, 1971), 212–14.
133. Frankenheimer abandoned scriptwriter Lewis John Carlino’s happy ending,
which united the subject with his original family, and instead made him a victim of the
malevolent corporation he had hired. See Stephen Bowie, “John Frankenheimer,”
http://www.sensesofcinema.com/2006/great-directors/frankenheimer/. See also
Peter Wilshire, “A Key Unturned: Seconds,” http://archive.sensesofcinema.com/
contents/01/18/seconds.html.
134. Seconds, “Storyboards,” box 11A, file 4, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
135. Okun interview, 2011.
136. Lonzo interview, 2012.
137. All the footage was apparently shot first with a normal lens, then projected
onto a distorted mirror surface and rephotographed while moving the mirror to create further distortions.

4. Modernism’s Multiplicity of Views
1. Philip B. Meggs, “Saul Bass on Corporate Identity,” in Design Culture: An
Anthology of Writing from the AIGA Journal of Graphic Design, ed. Steven Heller and
Marie Finamore (New York: Allworth Press, 1997), 72.
2. Sergei Eisenstein, “A Dialectical Approach to Film Form,” in Film Form: Essays
in Film Theory (New York: Harvest Books, 1949), 54.
3. Bell, “Oral History with Saul Bass,” 12. See also Mary Glucksman, “Saul Bass:
Due Credit,” Screen International, 13 May 1994, 27.

394

Notes to Pages 192–197
4. Reproduced in Ludwig Ebenhöh, “Saul Bass, USA,” Gebrauchsgraphik 27,
no. 11 (November 1956): 18.
5. It is possible that Bass met Nalpas while working on The Seven Year Itch at
National Screen Service. Interview with Mike Lonzo, 20 September 2012.
6. “Saul Bass [Interview],” Designer Magazine, May 1980, 10.
7. American Film Institute Seminar, 24.
8. Lars-Olaf Beier and Walter Midding, Vorspann: Zum Werk von Saul Bass
(Hamburg: North German Television [NDR], 1991), VHS tape, 28308-1, Saul
Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
9. Moholy-Nagy, Vision in Motion, 44.
10. Amos Gitai, Carmel (Tel Aviv: Munio Gitai Weintraub Architecture Museum,
2012), 40, 42.
11. Looking for Mr. Goodbar, “Title Art,” Richard Brooks Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
12. Beth Laski, “Art Rings ‘Clockers’ Alarm: Ads Redone after Gripes from Preminger Films,” Daily Variety, 24 September 1995, 1, 17.
13. E-mail from Sean Savage, Academy Film Archive, to the author, 21 September
2012. A 16mm negative of the sequence, completed up to the cinematographer’s
credit, survives in the Saul Bass Papers. Rebello quotes an unnamed Bass employee as
the source for the existence of these Anatomy credits but notes: “Bass contends the
story is untrue, and that the only similarity between the sequences was the use of ‘bars’
as a graphic motif.” See Stephen Rebello, “Psycho,” Cinefantastique 16, no. 4/5
(October 1986): 74.
14. See http://www.emovieposter.com/agallery/archiveitem/10998570.html.
The French poster doesn’t include the corpse, which is visible at the bottom of the
frame of the American half-sheet.
15. Anatomy of a Murder, “Record of Work Done” file, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
16. Ibid.
17. Timmer, “Making the Ordinary Extraordinary,” 75.
18. See the original trailer for Anatomy of a Murder at http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=54muV-xIhIU.
19. Winfried Günther, “A Shot Conveys an Outlook,” in Stanley Kubrick (Frankfurt: Deutsches Filmmuseum, 2004), 57.
20. See “Kubrick ‘Spartacus’ Director; Mann Out,” Daily Variety, 16 February
1959, 1, 4. The battle scenes were apparently shot in both the San Fernando Valley
and Spain. I have found no sources that actually list Bass as having directed the battle
scenes, although he may have been present at the California shoot. Reproductions of
the Spartacus storyboards indicate that Bass also designed a gladiator sequence and
the gladiator cages. See Spartacus—sequence storyboard illustrations by Saul Bass,
box 13A, file 21, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
21. Martin M. Winkler, Spartacus: Film and History (London: Wiley-Blackwell,
2007), 4.
22. B. D., “Spartacus,” Monthly Film Bulletin 28, no. 324 (January 1961): 6. See

395

Notes to Pages 198–205
also Bosley Crowther, “Spartacus,” New York Times, 7 October 1960, 28. For a positive review, see Brendan Gill, “Love and Slavery,” New Yorker, 15 October 1960, 133.
23. Bass was hired to do the battle scenes, which were originally supposed to be
merely hinted at: “I was working on the battle, because at first, it wasn’t going to be
a big epic picture, just reasonable . . . 2 or 3 million dollars. So they thought it would
be very interesting to do a symbolic battle, and they thought symbolic battle . . . that’s
Saul Bass, so they called me in and I was working on a symbolic battle. Then things
started getting a little out of hand, budget rising—it was now about 4 or 5 million—
so they said, let’s have a little more . . . let’s do an impressionistic battle. So I redid the
whole thing. Well, they were enlarging the picture, putting more and more things in,
and finally they said—Well gee, we can’t go down the line and then have somebody
look through the window and say ‘That’s a helluva battle going on down there’ . . .
what we need is an all out battle. So by this time I was the battle expert, and that’s how
I wound up doing what for me is this most unlikely thing.” Quoted in King, “Taking
Credit,” http://www.typotheque.com/articles/taking_credit_film_title_sequences_
1955–1965_6_musical_statues_spartacus_1960, and in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass,
197.
24. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 193–94.
25. King, “Taking Credit,” http://www.typothequecomarticles/taking_credit_
film_title_sequences_1955–1965_6_musical_statues_spartacus_1960.
26. “Injury Jinx Plagues Film,” Los Angeles Examiner, 6 July 1960, Facts of Life
production file, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
27. See Tube, “The Facts of Life,” Daily Variety, 14 November 1960, 3; “The Facts
of Life,” Limelight, 17 November 1960, production file, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
28. “Sexy Eyes over Hope’s Shoulder,” Life, 17 March 1961, 109.
29. Based on their style, Art Goodman was probably responsible for executing the
Facts of Life titles, as he was for the Advise and Consent poster.
30. The Saul Bass Papers include production elements of the following commercials: Speedway 79 (1955), Sun detergent (1956), National Bohemian beer (1957),
Olin Mathieson (1960), Band-Aid (1962), Mennen baby products (1962), Rainier
beer (1968), Mattel Toys (1969), Bridgestone tires (1968), Chevrolet OK cars
(1971), RCA (1968), Michigan Bell (1972), Olympia beer (1975), Dixie Cups
(1975), Rayovac batteries (1975), Girl Scout cookies (1977), Matushista (1978),
Security Pacific Bank (1979), Millar Gooseberries (n.d.), and Hallmark cards (n.d.).
Bass may have produced more commercials, but these are the only ones that survive.
31. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 96.
32. See Business Screen Magazine 24, no. 4 (1963): 381.
33. The Mennen Baby Magic commercial is on YouTube: http://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=20zxateRV44&feature=fvwrel.
34. See this Mennen Genteel Baby Bath soap commercial on YouTube: http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=_T-C6bMp1Vw.
35. Bass’s Mennen Genteel Baby Bath soap commercial survives in the Saul Bass
Collection, 22403-1, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.

396

Notes to Pages 205–212
36. The Bass Collection has sixty- and thirty-second commercials for Mattel’s Toy
and Hobby Book, Peanuts wind-up toys, and Toot Sweet, all from the same period,
but they may have been used only for reference.
37. RCA “The Kid” commercial, 16mm color, 1 minute, 84138-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
38. It has been argued that this commercial was not produced by Bass, but there
is no documentary evidence either way. Given that it was found in the Bass Collection,
I believe there is enough formal evidence to claim that it was produced by Bass. See
e-mail from Jennifer Bass to the author, 6 April 2013.
39. Kepes reproduces Marcel Duchamp’s Nude Descending the Stairs (1912), Herbert Matter’s advertisement for the Container Corporation of America, and Harold E.
Edgerton’s photograph “Golfer” (n.d.). See Kepes, Language of Vision, 180–82.
40. Most of the posters and advertisements for the film have a decidedly un-Basslike look to them, but Bass’s record of work for the film indicates that he designed at
least one trade advertisement. See Attack! “Record of Work,” box 1A, file 26, Saul
Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
41. David Badder, Bob Baker, and Markku Salmi, “Saul Bass,” Film Dope 3
(August 1973): 1.
42. Edwin T. Arnold and Eugene L. Miller, The Films and Career of Robert Aldrich
(Nashville: University of Tennessee Press, 1986), 69.
43. Super Panavision 70mm was in fact almost identical to Todd-AO. West Side
Story was also produced in Super Panavision 70. See http://www.widescreenmuseum
.com/widescreen/wingsp1.htm.
44. “Saul Bass Gets Tricky,” Hollywood Reporter, 20 October 1966, 13.
45. “Bass Doing Effects,” Hollywood Reporter, 29 June 1966, 9. See also “Dialogue on Film: John Frankenheimer,” American Film 14, no. 5 (March 1989): 24.
Bass stated that Albert Nalpas edited the sequences with him. See American Film
Institute Seminar, 8.
46. “Cinerama Makes Deal with Frankenheimer/Lewis,” Hollywood Reporter, 30
November 1964, 1, 4; “‘Grand Prix’ 1st Film Securing Cinerama Mantling sans
Release,” Daily Variety, 30 November 1964, 1; “MGM to Finance Release Cinerama
Prod’n, ‘Grand Prix,’” Daily Variety, 10 September 1965, 1.
47. “Casting ‘Prix’ on MGM Lot; Pic Rolls May 22,” Daily Variety, 15 February
1966, 20.
48. Grand Prix, box 3A, file 33, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
49. “Grand Prix,” Film Daily, 5 August 1966. In addition, a new 70mm, highspeed color film processor was used at MGM labs for release prints. See “MGM Using
New ‘Prix’ Processor,” Daily Variety, 1 December 1966, 3.
50. “Grand Prix Gross Tops Mil in Cinerama Dome Run,” Daily Variety, 23
October 1967, 3; “Cinerama to Earn More than $5 Million,” Hollywood Reporter, 21
April 1967, 1, 3.
51. “Ways of Winning,” New Yorker, 31 December 1966, 60; Pry, “Grand Prix,”
Daily Variety, 22 December 1966, 3, 15.

397

Notes to Pages 212–218
52. Pauline Kael, “A Sense of Disproportion,” New Republic, 14 January 1967,
41–42.
53. Bosley Crowther, “Screen: Flag Is Down at Warner for ‘Grand Prix,’” New
York Times, 22 December 1966, http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9F
07E7D8123CE43BBC4A51DFB467838D679EDE.
54. Stephen Bowie writes on the Senses of Cinema website: “The indifference of
the all-not-quite-star-cast toward the material is matched by Frankenheimer’s indifference toward them, as if the director didn’t want the Ferraris upstaged by any showy
acting. See http://www.sensesofcinema.com/2006/great-directors/frankenheimer/.
55. According to some sources, it was apparently Elaine Bass’s idea to have the
screen go silent.
56. See Hal Hinson, “Mr. Saturday Night,” Washington Post, 25 September 1992,
http://www.washingtonpost.com/wp-srv/style/longterm/movies/videos/
mrsaturdaynightrhinson_a0a79f.htm; Peter Travers, “Mr. Saturday Night,” Rolling
Stone, http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/reviews-mr-saturday-night-20010227.
57. Jeffrey Wells, “Another Battle between Artistic Truth and Mass Appeal: And
the Loser Is . . . ,” Los Angeles Times Calendar, 18 October 1992, Mr. Saturday Night
production files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
58. Marilyn Moss, “Mr. Saturday Night,” Box Office, December 1992, R-87, Mr.
Saturday Night production files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
59. Julie Salamon, “Mr. Saturday Night,” Wall Street Journal, 24 September 1992.
See also Todd McCarthy, “Mr. Saturday Night,” Daily Variety, 14 September 1992,
3, 12, who writes: “The title sequence by Saul and Elaine Bass hilariously sends up the
preparation of Jewish food faves.” Janet Maslin characterized the title sequence as
“vivid,” “complete with cabbage stuffing.” See Janet Maslin, “Billy Crystal, in Directorial Debut, Stars as Obnoxious Stand up Comic,” New York Times, 23 September
1992, http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9B06E3D6123AF930A1575
AC0A964958260.
60. Michael Sragow, “Shtick Shifts,” New Yorker, 5 October 1992, 162–64.
61. The hands reportedly belonged to Elaine Bass, who had a huge hand in creating the title sequence (no pun intended).
62. The Basses were apparently not happy with Billy Crystal’s abrasive commentary. They subsequently created the sequence as a stand-alone film without narration
and with different music. Their version, dated 1993–1994, remains in the Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS. See e-mail from Sean Savage to the author,
15 March 2013.
63. V. I. Pudovkin, Film Technique and Film Acting (New York: Grove Press,
1970), 97.
64. The whole film takes place on one empty set with the actors mingling as the
camera roams between them, intercut with photos and other visual material to illustrate points the speakers are making. Bob Aller, who worked as a production assistant
on Bass on Titles, directed. It is also possible that Gene McGarr directed at least some
of the film, as he was the announced director in Variety: “Gene McGarr will direct a
Westinghouse promo film for Saul Bass & Ass., marking the first time in the 20 year

398

Notes to Pages 219–220
history of Bass’ company that someone other than Bass will direct one of its films.”
Both the announced writer and cameraman were credited in the film. See “Pix, People, Pickups,” Daily Variety, 3 May 1976, 3.
65. Interview with Herb Yager, 27 February 2013, Ojai, CA. The first physical
indication of Bass’s involvement is a telephone memo from a secretary to Bass dated 3
January 1978, in which Michael Britton (Wildwood Productions) confirms an honorarium of $10,000 for Bass and $15,000 for a writer on project. The first letter of
agreement is dated 25 January 1978. See also letter from Michael Britton to Herb
Yager, 1 March 1978, re “Alternative Energy Source Film,” Solar Film, “Film Agreements,” box 12A, file 87, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS; “Saul
Bass Busy Writing, Directing Theatrical Project,” Hollywood Reporter, 7 September
1978, 8.
66. Allan Richards, “Lola Redford and Ilene Goldman: Consumer Action Now,”
Mother Earth News, July–August 1972, http://www.motherearthnews.com/naturecommunity/interview-redford-goldman/zmaz72jaztak.aspx.
67. Solar Film script dated 22 November 1976: “Caging the Sun.” The final
approved script is called “Solar Energy” and is dated 1 May 1979, box 12A, file 53,
Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
68. The budget was allocated as follows: live-action sequences, $82,549; animation, $114,300; postproduction, $120,850. See letter from Rafael de la Sierra (Warner Communications) to Michael Britton (Wildwood Productions), 10 April 1979,
“Film Agreements,” box 12A, file 87, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
69. Clarke Taylor, “Redford’s Solar Film Screens,” Los Angeles Times, 6 March
1980, production file, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
70. See Solar Film, “Log Book Dailies, Shot Charts,” box 12A, file 105, Saul Bass
Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
71. Nancy Collins, “Redford Shines at Premiere of His ‘Solar Film,’” Los Angeles
Herald Examiner, 18 March 1980, A10.
72. Lee Grant, “Robert Redford Finds a Place in the Sun,” Los Angeles Times, 29
March 1980, 8.
73. Among its film festival awards were the Golden Cine Eagle Award; Gold
Medal, Chicago Film Festival; Golden Mercury, Venice Film Festival; Bronze Medal,
Huesca Short Film Fest (Spain); Golden Cindy IFPA (Information Producers of
America); Bronze Medal, Columbus Film Fest; Diploma Ekofilm International Fest
(Czechoslovakia); and Diploma Aspen International Film Fest.
74. Lee Grant, “Robert Redford Finds a Place in the Sun,” Los Angeles Times, 29
March 1980, 8.
75. Charles Champlin, “Solar Film Having an Extended Run,” Los Angeles Times,
9 May 1980, production file, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
76. Dale Pollack, “Live Action Shorts up for Award,” Los Angeles Times, 29 March
1980, sec. 2, 9.
77. Stanley Mason, “Saul and Elaine Bass: A New Film on Solar Energy,” Graphis
37, no. 232 (September–October 1981): 156–59.

399

Notes to Pages 220–227
78. Robert Redford noted in a letter to Saul Bass dated 25 November 1980: “The
issue of theatrical distribution is much more complex. I agree with you that there is
more to be done here and that our original expectations were never really met.” Box
12A, file 95, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
79. See letter from Lyn Adams (Pyramid Films) to Saul Bass, 5 November 1980, Solar
Film, “Pyramid,” box 13A, file 8, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
80. Letter from Sheldon Renan (Pyramid) to Saul Bass, 20 March 1980, box 13A,
file 8, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. Pyramid offered 22.5 percent on the gross dollar for normal print sales and rentals, 50 percent of the net on
sublicensing, and $5,000 against royalties, payable no later than eighteen months after
the nontheatrical release. However, Warner’s legal department blocked the deal for
months, even though Pyramid was already promoting the film.
81. Letter from Michael Britton (Wildwood) to Lyn Adams (Pyramid), 8 June
1981, Solar Film, “Pyramid,” box 13A, file 8, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
82. The Solar Film, press release, Wildwood Enterprises, production files, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
83. Interestingly, as Sean Savage from the Academy Film Archive has confirmed,
all 16mm prints still bore the original title, although the credits were changed to add
Elaine Bass’s directorial credit. See e-mail from Sean Savage to the author, 15 March
2013. In a letter from Saul Bass to Michael Britton, 14 August 1980, he acknowledged Elaine’s contribution to the film: “The fact is, as you know, that the film is overwhelmingly a product of my work and Elaine’s work.” In fact, Bass credited Elaine in
a way he never did for other designers working in his office, even when they took the
lead on projects. See “Correspondence with Various Subcontractors,” box 14A, file
95, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
84. Interview with Jeff Okun, 23 March 2012, Hollywood, CA.
85. Earlier outlines and treatments of the film apparently included at least one
more animated section—a dialogue about solar energy, similar to the “A Digression”
dialogue between snails in Why Man Creates. Another outline included at least three
animated sections. Solar Film, “Press Materials,” box 13A, file 6, Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
86. The “Big Trouble” animation sequence originally included the following
before getting to the discovery of coal as an energy source: cottage industries, water
power, population explosion, inventions, steam, and wood. See letter from Saul Bass
to Stan Hart, 11 September 1978, and script attachment, box 12A, file 24, Saul Bass
Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
87. The actual roll text in the print does not end with a question mark.
88. Krag and Volsted, Title Sequence Seminar, 67.

5. The Urban Landscape
1. Quoted in Marjorie Perloff, “The Avant-Garde Phase of American Modernism,” in Cambridge Companion to American Modernism, ed. Walter B. Kalaidjian
(Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2005), 195.

400

Notes to Pages 227–233
2. See Jan-Christopher Horak, “Paul Strand and Charles Sheeler’s Manhatta,” in
Horak, Lovers of Cinema, 267.
3. Sergei Eisenstein, The Film Sense (London: Faber and Faber, 1948), 83,
quoted in Scott McQuire, “Immaterial Architectures: Urban Space and Electric
Light,” Space and Culture 8 (2005): 126.
4. Kepes, Language of Vision, 154. Opposite this discussion, Kepes reproduces a
Bernice Abbott photograph, “Night View” (1932), taken from a high angle looking
down on nighttime New York.
5. Interview with James Hollander, 31 October 2012, Burbank, CA.
6. Sullivan, “Work of Saul Bass,” 67.
7. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 3.
8. See Mike Connolly, “Rambling Reporter,” Hollywood Reporter, 16 December
1952, 2. See also the production history of the film in the American Film Institute
Catalog of Motion Pictures, http://www.afi.com/members/catalog/DetailView
.aspx?s=&Movie=51652.
9. See “Feldman Pays 225G for ‘7 Year Itch,’” Hollywood Reporter, 20 February
1953, 1; Los Angeles Daily News clipping, 8 March 1953, and unidentified clipping,
12 May 1954, Seven Year Itch production files, microfilm, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
10. “Main Titles by NSS!” Variety, 10 August 1955, 17.
11. According to George Axelrod, who was interviewed for the DVD edition of
the film, he and Wilder fought huge battles with Joseph Breen’s MPPC Office and
were forced to eliminate or rewrite numerous lines of dialogue.
12. Land, “The Seven Year Itch,” Daily Variety, 8 June 1955, 6.
13. Jack Moffitt, “The Seven Year Itch,” Hollywood Reporter, 3 June 1955, 3; the
Showman’s and Motion Picture Daily reviews are quoted in “Main Titles by NSS!”
14. Quoted in Lowell E. Redelings, “Men behind the Scenes,” Los Angeles Citizen
News, 24 October 1955, box 23A, file 8, “Clippings,” Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
15. In Billy Wilder’s Filme (Berlin: Verlag Volker Spiess, 1980), 389, Neil Sinyard
and Adrian Turner argue that the opening and closing of boxes refer to the game of
confusion in Feydeau’s farces.
16. Susan Reed and Doris Bacon, “Director Billy Wilder Puts His Legendary $22
Million-or-So Art Collection on the Auction Block,” People, 13 November 1989,
http://www.people.com/people/archive/article/0,,20115935,00.html.
17. See “Four Just Men,” Dinosaur TV website, http://www.78rpm.co.uk/tv4
.htm.
18. Titles for Four Just Men, 16mm print, 11693-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
19. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 44.
20. Apparently, Bass produced a title sequence for The Young Stranger that consisted solely of graphics; it is in the Saul Bass Collection, 57998-1, Academy Film
Archive, AMPAS. Like the published version, Bass’s original begins with the camera
zooming in and around a close-up pencil drawing of a young man’s face; then it con-

401

Notes to Pages 233–236
tinues panning to a close-up of the eye before cutting to a second pencil-drawn image
of a young man walking away, his back to the observer, while the camera zooms in on
the back of his head for Frankenheimer’s directorial credit. The final version dissolves
to a young male student walking on campus, immediately after the costarring credits.
It is highly likely that Bass removed his name from the final credits—which are
included in the original version—due to these changes. Was Frankenheimer unable to
pay for all the designs, or did he think they were too weird, leading him to abbreviate
the graphic portion? Although the Bass Papers include photos of the graphic designs,
no correspondence survives to clear up this issue. See “The Young Stranger,” box
14A, file 40–41, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
21. See Leonard J. Leff, “Hitchcock at Metro,” Western Humanities Review 37,
no. 2 (Summer 1983): 97.
22. In Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 182, this image is still overlaid with a grid, but
it isn’t in the film.
23. The elevator metaphor is evoked by Bass himself in his official description of
the sequence; see North by Northwest, “Title Description,” box 4A, file 35, Saul Bass
Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. Beth Gilligan’s description of the sequence
doesn’t mention the element of the counterweight; see North by Northwest, 2005,
http://www.notcoming.com/saulbass/caps_nxnw.php.
24. Spoto, Art of Alfred Hitchcock, 353.
25. “Violent green” is Bass’s adjective in the official description of the titles, box
4A, file 35, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
26. Hitchcock is seen most famously as an annoyed reader on the London subway
in Blackmail (1929), in Victoria Station in The Lady Vanishes (1938), on a train in
Shadow of a Doubt (1943), leaving a train with a cello case in The Paradine Case
(1947), boarding a train with a bass in Strangers on a Train (1951), and sitting on a
bus in To Catch a Thief (1955).
27. Art, “Alcoa Premiere,” Variety, 18 October 1961, 35, reprinted in Variety Television Reviews 1923–1988 (New York: Garland Publishing, 1989).
28. See http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0054513/plotsummary; Tim Brooks and
Earle Marsh, eds., The Complete Directory to Prime Time Network and Cable Shows:
1946–Present (New York: Ballantine Books, 1999), 7, 24.
29. See Connie Bruck, When Hollywood Had a King (New York: Random House,
2003), 162, 186; Dennis McDougal, The Last Mogul: Lew Wasserman, MCA, and the
Hidden History of Hollywood (New York: Crown Publishers, 1998), 189–91, 193.
30. See Al-Zalean, March–June 1963 and September–October 1964; e-mail from
Carol Ellis, director, University of South Alabama Archives, 6 May 2011.
31. See Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 294. The brochure’s cover features a highly
abstract, modernist design of green, blue, and purple bars, similar to the design concept for Frank Sinatra’s album Tone Poems of Color (1956) and Bass’s Psycho titles.
32. Alcoa advertisement, Wall Street Journal, 21 February 1963, 12.
33. See “Alcoa Changes Its Trademark,” Industrial Marketing 38 (February
1963): 120; “Alcoa’s Public Relations Department Played Key Role in Introducing
New Logo,” PR News, 23 December 1963, reprinted in David P. Bianco, ed., PR

402

Notes to Pages 236–241
News Casebook: 1,000 Public Relations Case Studies (Detroit: Gale Research, 1993),
1574.
34. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 296.
35. See “Alcoa New Mark TV Commercial,” 15014-1, 16159-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
36. “In London,” Daily Variety, 24 August 1965, 4.
37. Reprinted in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 295.
38. The Hollywood Reporter notes that the main titles would be completed the
week of 26 June. See “‘West Side’ Windup,” Hollywood Reporter, 27 June 1961, 10.
39. Bass recalled that the opening for West Side Story was “a take-off on the earlier
title design for North by Northwest.” See Morgenstern, “Saul Bass,” 42.
40. In an extra on the 2003 DVD release, Robbins states that he had been trying
to produce a modern version of Shakespeare’s play since the 1940s. However, since
Robbins had no film directing experience, he was relegated to codirector status. See
also Lars-Olav Beier, Der unbestechliche Blick. Robert Wise und Seine Filme (Berlin:
Bertz Verlag, 1996), 87.
41. “West Side Story,” Filmfacts, 3 November 1961, 245–48. See also Daily Variety, 7 December 1960. Robbins completed the prologue and the musical numbers
“America,” “Cool,” and “I Feel Pretty.” See Beier, Robert Wise und Seine Filme, 88.
42. Arthur Knight, “Romeo Revisited: West Side Story,” Saturday Review, 14
October 1961, 40.
43. See James Powers, “West Side Story Hailed as B.O. Smash, Great Film Work,”
Hollywood Reporter, 6 October 1961, 3; Whit, “West Side Story,” Variety, 27 September 1961, 6.
44. Todd McCarthy, “Jets Have Their Way Onscreen,” Daily Variety, 5 June
2009, 8. See also James D. Ivers, “West Side Story,” Motion Picture Herald, 4 October
1961; Frank Leyendecker, “West Side Story,” Box Office, 4 October 1961, all in production files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
45. It has been suggested that the dancing figures, visible in the production’s letterhead, were altered by the studio to be more figurative. See Bass and Kirkham, Saul
Bass, 199.
46. See the auction history and images for West Side Story at http://www
.emovieposter.com/agaller y/film_title/WEST%2520SIDE%2520STORY
%2520%28%2761%29/archive.html.
47. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 200–201. Ascertaining credit here is as complicated as the sequences Bass designed for Psycho and Spartacus.
48. See the anecdote in T. J. Edwards, “West Side Story, 1961 Road Show Feature,”
Cinema Sightlines website, http://cinemasightlines.com/roadshow_westsidestory
.php.
49. Marino Amoruso and John Gallagher, “Robert Wise: Part One ‘The RKO
Years,’” Grand Illusions (Winter 1977), quoted in Frank Thompson, Robert Wise: A
Bio-Bibliography (Westport, CT: Greenwood Press, 1995), 82.
50. David Badder, Bob Baker, and Markku Salmi, “Saul Bass,” Film Dope 3
(August 1973): 4.

403

Notes to Pages 242–251
51. See the sequence on YouTube: http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=A7tL7gXjPk. I’m grateful to Arnold Schwartzman for alerting me to this film.
52. Although there is no documentation, the trailer’s construction indicates that
Bass may have been involved. See West Side Story trailer, http://www.youtube.com/
watch?v=5G31aw3R0x4.
53. Eugene Archer, “Capturing Something Wild for the Camera,” New York
Times, 8 July 1960, production files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
54. See Hollywood Reporter, 3 June 1961.
55. Interview with Jack Garfein, 19 September 2010, Los Angeles.
56. Albert Johnson, “Jack Garfein: An Interview,” Film Quarterly 17, no. 1
(Autumn 1963): 36.
57. “Something Wild,” New Yorker, 30 December 1961, 45.
58. “Films of the Quarter,” Film Quarterly 15, no. 3 (Spring 1962): 71.
59. See, for example, J. Hobermann’s 2006 review in the Village Voice, http://
www.villagevoice.com/2006–12–19/film/method-to-her-madness/.
60. Hazel Flynn, “Something Wild Is Strange Enigma,” Los Angeles Citizen News,
18 May 1962, production files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
61. Johnson, “Jack Garfein,” 36.
62. Flavia Wharton, “Something Wild,” Films in Review, February 1962, 110.
63. A Star Is Born (1954), trade advertisement, reproduction in the possession of
Al Kallis.
64. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 52, 396.
65. Thanks to Dino Everett, director of the Hugh Hefner Film Archive at the University of Southern California, who graciously gave me access to the show.
66. See Playhouse 90: Journey to the Day, broadcast 22 April 1960, tape available at
Archive Research and Study Center, UCLA Film and Television Archive.
67. See Playhouse 90 opening description, box 16A, file 28, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
68. Hal Erickson, Syndicated Television: The First Forty Years, 1947–1987 (Jefferson, NC: McFarland, 1989), 168–69.
69. See the Westinghouse magazine advertisement in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass,
49.
70. “PM East [TV] Opening Description,” box 16A, file 29, Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
71. Tube, “Ocean’s Eleven,” Variety, 10 August 1960, 6.
72. For a detailed history of the film’s production, as reflected in the press, see The
American Film Institute Catalog of Motion Pictures Produced in the United States, vol.
6, Feature Films, 1961–1970 (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1971).
73. See “Lawford to Vegas,” Daily Variety, 31 October 1958, 5; “Ocean’s Start
Date,” Daily Variety, 25 November 1958, 18; “Bill of the Year (’60): Frankie, Dino
& Sammy,” Weekly Variety, 4 November 1959, 1, 58.
74. See Los Angeles Examiner, 7 August 1960, 9, 12.
75. Unidentified Hollywood Reporter clipping, “Ocean’s Eleven, Clippings,” box
4A, file 77, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.

404

Notes to Pages 251–262
76. Tube, “Ocean’s Eleven,” Variety, 10 August 1960, 6.
77. Blog post by Mark Webster, Ocean’s Eleven, 23 April 2009, http://
motiondesign.wordpress.com/.
78. According to James Hollander, the Bass office created hundreds of drawings
to visualize the creative process of designing a new corporate logo for executives at
AT&T. Interview with James Hollander, 31 October 2012, Burbank, CA.
79. Martin Scorsese, interview by the British Film Institute, 11 February 1993,
VHS tape, 15163-1-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
80. Quoted in Pat Kirkham, “Bright Lights, Big City,” Sight & Sound 6 (January
1996): 12–13.
81. E-mail from Sean Savage to the author, 15 March 2013.
82. Beier and Midding, Vorspann: Zum Werk von Saul Bass.
83. Letter from Douglas Owens (Universal Pictures) to Saul Bass, 21 September
1994; letter from SEB to Martin Scorsese, 26 October 1994 (includes Bass’s actual
sketch below the designers’ signatures), “Letterhead,” box 2A, file 2, Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
84. Letter from Elaine and Saul Bass to Barbara De Fina, 19 June 1995, sent via
fax, “Casino Costs,” box 2A, file 18, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
85. Mick LaSalle, “Scorsese’s ‘Casino’ Comes up Broke/Stone’s the Only Ace in
a Bad Hand,” San Francisco Chronicle, 22 November 1995, http://www.sfgate
.com/movies/article/Scorsese-s-Casino-Comes-Up-Broke-Stone-s-the-3018766
.php.
86. Janet Maslin, “A Money-Mad Mirage from Scorsese,” New York Times, 22
November 1995, 9; Peter Travers, “Casino,” Rolling Stone, 22 November 1995,
http://www.rollingstone.com/movies/reviews/casino-19951122. Travers wrote:
“With Casino, based on material from Nicholas Pileggi’s nonfiction book (names have
been changed and events altered for the film), Scorsese tries to weave visual poetry out
of warped ambitions.”
87. In the correspondence for Casino, the Basses specifically request to see the
footage of the Exodus flames, which may or may not have been recycled here.
88. The Capitol Records album (SM-1573) was released in 1961. See http://
www.discogs.com/Stan-Freberg-Presents-The-United-States-Of-America-Vol1-The-Early-Years/master/281065. The show’s bumper was also produced by Bass
and included the same extreme low-angle shot of pedestrians found in Something
Wild.
89. Walter Herdeg, ed., Film and TV Graphics: An International Survey of Film
and Television Graphics (Zurich: Graphis Press, 1967), 79.
90. Tube, “Stan Freberg Presents Chinese New Year’s Eve,” Daily Variety, 6 February 1962, 16.
91. “National Bohemian Beer—Record of Work Done,” box 62A, file 20, Saul
Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
92. “Lights Out,” “Peanut,” and “Don’t Touch that Dial,” 16mm, 21768-1, Saul
Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.

405

Notes to Pages 262–271
93. There were numerous commercials for Rainier beer, including “Awakening”
(twenty seconds), “Storm and Clearing” (thirty seconds), and “Aerial” (one minute),
dated 28 December 1966. See “Rainier Brewing Company Storyboard Descriptions,”
box 64A, file 29, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, and the 16mm color
prints, 17608-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS. These are the
least Bass-like of any of his work, so he may have been only minimally involved in their
production.
94. “Andy Parker aka Regular Joe,” National Bohemian beer, 16mm, 21768-1,
Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
95. Ibid., 78788-1.
96. See “Burnt Match,” “Peanut,” and “Lights Out,” National Bohemian beer,
16mm, 21874-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.

6. Journeys of Discovery: Seeing Is Knowledge
1. The literature on this phenomenon is voluminous. See Tom Gunning, “An
Unseen Energy Swallows Space: The Space in Early Film and Its Relation to American
Avant-Garde Film,” in Film before Griffith, ed. John L. Fell (Berkeley: University of
California Press, 1983), 355–66.
2. Letter from Geoffrey Shurlock (MPAA/PCA) to David Susskind, 16 March
1956, Production Code Administration files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
3. “Edge of the City,” Daily Variety, 26 December 1956, 3.
4. Bosley Crowther, “Edge of the City,” New York Times, 30 January 1957,
http://movies.nytimes.com/movie/review?res=9D04E6DF143EE23BBC4850DF
B766838C649EDE.
5. Edwin Fancher, “Movies: Edge of the City,” Village Voice, 3 April 1957, http://
news.google.com/newspapers?id=Pd4QAAAAIBAJ&sjid=EIwDAAAAIBAJ&pg=66
09,4662036&dq=movies&hl=en.
6. The DVD version of Edge of the City, distributed by Warner Brothers Home
Video, is missing the rectangular light patterns.
7. American Film Institute Seminar, 14.
8. “Uris Scripts Wyler Film,” Hollywood Reporter, 9 May 1957, 2.
9. Jan Herman, A Talent for Trouble: William Wyler (New York: G. P. Putnam’s
Sons, 1995), 382.
10. Letter from Gregory Peck to Leon Roth, 11 April 1957, Gregory Peck Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library Special Collections, AMPAS, quoted in Jason Gendler,
“Saul Bass and Title Design: Intention and Reception, and Production Integration”
(paper presented at Society of Cinema and Media Studies Conference, Los Angeles,
March 2010).
11. The Big Country press book, production files, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
12. Axel Madsen, William Wyler (New York: Thomas Y. Crowell, 1973), 333.
13. For technical details about Technirama, see http://www.widescreenmuseum
.com/widescreen/techniramaspecs.htm.
14. Saul Bass, “Thoughts on Film,” in Communication: The Art of Understand-

406

Notes to Pages 271–278
ing and Being Understood, ed. Robert O. Bach (New York: Hastings House, 1963),
23.
15. Herman, Talent for Trouble, 392. See also Michael Freedland, Gregory Peck
(New York: William Morrow, 1980), 151.
16. W. R. Wilkerson, “Trade Views,” Hollywood Reporter, 25 August 1958, 2.
17. Bosley Crowther, “War and Peace on Range in ‘Big Country’; Gregory Peck
Stars in Wyler’s Western; Action-Packed Film Scores Violence,” New York Times, 2
October 1958, 44.
18. P. J. D., “The Big Country,” Monthly Film Bulletin, 12 November 1958, 14.
19. “The Big Country,” Time, 8 September 1958, 96, quoted in Madsen, William
Wyler, 333.
20. The Big Country poster reproduced in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 174, is not
one of the release posters; it is Bass’s own preferred silk-screen design.
21. “Graphics—Mr. Saul Bass,” in International Television Design Conference
(London: BBC Television Centre, 1962), 8.
22. Chris Fujiwara, The World and Its Double: The Life and Work of Otto Preminger
(New York: Faber and Faber, 2008), 299.
23. “Report Cardinal Spellman Frowns on ‘Cardinal’ Film as Invasion of Privacy,”
Daily Variety, 10 August 1955, 2.
24. Hirsch, Otto Preminger, 370.
25. “Two Soviet Directors Arrive to Observe Preminger Megging ‘The Cardinal’
Here,” Daily Variety, 6 May 1963, 1.
26. “Cardinal Rentals Pass $7 Million Mark,” Hollywood Reporter, 22 May 1964,
1.
27. Bosley Crowther, “Episodes of a Man of the Cloth: ‘The Cardinal’ Opens at
the DeMille,” New York Times, 13 December 1963.
28. Irene Thirer, “The Cardinal,” New York Post, 13 December 1963, quoted in
Hirsch, Otto Preminger, 385.
29. Hollis Alpert, “A Cardinal’s Chronicle,” Saturday Review, 7 December 1963,
32. See also Hazel Flynn, “Otto Preminger Oozes Optimism,” Los Angeles Citizen
News, 8 December 1963, box 2A, file 11, “Clippings,” Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
30. In the strangest placement of a Bass design in any trailer, the logo and poster
are shown twice, but only briefly in the background as set decoration. Was this done
to avoid the payment of further royalties? See The Cardinal trailer, which is a mini
“making of” movie, at http://www.youtube.com/watch?v=mdH2ivqB1Uc.
31. See The Cardinal, “Titles Description,” box 2A, file 15, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
32. Edward Dmytryk, It’s a Hell of a Life but Not a Bad Living (New York: New
York Times Books, 1978), 247.
33. Michael Bierut, “Catching the Big One,” ID: The International Design Magazine 42, no. 1 (January–February 1995): 48.
34. “Feldman Packaging ‘Wild Side’ for UA; Capucine to Star,” Daily Variety, 24
January 1961, 1.

407

Notes to Pages 278–287
35. “Actor Harvey No Fan of Feldman,” Variety, 9 May 1962, 5.
36. “Feldman Cancels Wild New Orleans; Complains of City Fathers’ Hostility,”
Daily Variety, 20 February 1962, 1.
37. Nic Francis, “Bass PHASE IV,” Screen ’n’ Heard, March 1973, 10.
38. Interview with Arnold Schwartzman, 20 February 2013, Los Angeles.
39. Walk on the Wild Side, “Titles Description,” box 13A, file 49, Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
40. Quoted in Francis, “Bass PHASE IV,” 10.
41. See Hedda Hopper, “Old World Charm Seen as Decadence,” Los Angeles
Times, 15 February 1962, pt. IV, 20; Brendan Gill, “Walk on the Wild Side,” New
Yorker, 24 February 1962, 111.
42. See Philip K. Scheurer, “Walk on the Wild Side Tame?” Los Angeles Times, 8
March 1962; “Walk on the Wild Side,” Show Business Illustrated, April 1962.
43. Hazel Flynn, “‘Wild Side’ Film Suspense Shocker,” Los Angeles Citizen News,
8 March 1962. See also James D. Ivers, “A Walk on the Wild Side,” Motion Picture
Herald, 7 February 1962; Lawrence H. Lipskin, “A Walk on the Wild Side Strong,”
Hollywood Reporter, 29 January 1962, 3.
44. Dennis McLellan, “Judith Crist Dies at 90; Film Critic ‘Most Hated by Hollywood,’” Los Angeles Times, 8 August 2012.
45. Judith Crist, “This Week’s Movies,” TV Guide, n.d., clipping in “Walk on the
Wild Side,” box 13A, file 44, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
46. See the entry in Oxford English Dictionary, http://www.oed.com/view/
Entry/266205#eid43330280.
47. A photo of the theater and a brief description of the film are available on the
1964 World’s Fair website, http://www.worldsfairphotos.com/nywf64transportation
-travel.htm.
48. From Here to There, “Awards,” box 3A, file 24, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
49. See the Pyramid Films catalog description. The 16mm film rented for $15 and
could be purchased outright for $130.
50. “From Here to There,” Cue Magazine, 11 July 1964.
51. Undated review from Hollywood Reporter, From Here to There, “Clippings,”
box 3A, file 25, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS; “Turn Your
Dream to Reality,” Los Angeles Herald Examiner, 12 July 1964. See also “New York
Fair,” Time, 3 July 1964.
52. See Moholy-Nagy, New Vision (2005), 38, 183, 202; Kepes, Language of
Vision, 74.
53. See http://www.worldsfairphotos.com/nywf64/kodak.htm.
54. “Saul Bass’ ‘Searching 1-Eye’ Spotlights Eastman Kodak’s Tiptop Exhibit,”
Variety, 29 April 1964, 178. A second industrial film, produced in-house by Kodak,
was shown in a smaller theater in the pavilion, also on the half hour.
55. Myron A. Matzkin, “Movie Maker,” Modern Photography, July 1964, 111.
56. Sean Savage notes in a 15 March 2013 e-mail: “The film was projected first as
a 35/70 interlocked projection onto a single screen. The imagery is checker-boarded

408

Notes to Pages 288–290
between the two strands of film, one falling away to make room for the other. And as
for versions, I’m pretty convinced a shorter dual-system edit replaced the first version
during its run in the Kodak Pavilion. There was a third, possibly unfinished singlestrand 35mm version, and the 16mm Pyramid version had a completely new
narration.”
57. See Kodak publicity brochure, Groundbreaking at the New York World’s Fair,
1964–65 (New York: New York World’s Fair Corporation, 1962), 6, http://www
.worldsfairphotos.com/nywf64/booklets/kodak-groundbreaking-8-21-62.pdf.
58. The index card states: “Photo, pavilion proposal.” See “Eastman Kodak Co.—
Record of Work Done,” box 50A, file 21, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMAPS. See also Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 92–93; Saul Bass & Associates v. United
States, no. 373-68, U.S. Court of Claims, July 19, 1974, http://www.leagle.com/
decision/19741891505F2d1386_11626.xml/SAUL%20BASS%20&%20
ASSOCIATES%20v.%20UNITED%20STATES.
59. “Saul Bass Producing Eastman Kodak Short,” Hollywood Reporter, 19
September 1963, 8; “Moppet Lane ‘Eye-d,’” Daily Variety, 1 October 1963, 3.
60. See Ute Eskildsen and Jan-Christopher Horak, eds., Film und Foto der zwanziger Jahre (Stuttgart: Verlag Gerd Hatje, 1979); Jan-Christopher Horak, “Film and
Foto: Towards a Language of Silent Film,” Afterimage 7, no. 5 (December 1979).
61. The Searching Eye, “Misc. 1970,” box 10A, file 38, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
62. Quoted in David A. Sohn, “The ‘Eyes’ Have It,” in Pyramid Films, The Searching Eye brochure, reprinted in Media & Methods, September 1970.
63. See Jacob Deschin, “Novel Pavilion Has Various Program of Shorts and Picture Services,” New York Times, 19 April 1964; Bosley Crowther, “The Screen: Creative and Exhilarating,” New York Times, 23 April 1964, 1, 12; Bosley Crowther,
“Advance in Art of Cinema Seen in Film at World’s Fair,” New York Times, 10 May
1964; Bosley Crowther, “Once More to the Fair,” New York Times, 5 September
1964.
64. “Come to the Fair. Meet Me at the Kodak Picture Tower,” New York Times,
26 April 1964, sec. 11.
65. Deschin, “Novel Pavilion”; The Searching Eye, “Clippings,” box 10A, file 36,
Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
66. James Powers, “H’wood Mastery Marks World’s Fair Films,” Hollywood
Reporter, 29 May 1964 , 3.
67. Matzkin, “Movie Maker,” 111. See also Ralph Miller, “Kodak Opens Fair
Exhibit with Bass’ ‘The Searching Eye,’” New York World-Telegram and Sun, 16 April
1964, 44; “World’s Fair ‘Sells’ Photography,” Photo Weekly, 27 April 1964; Judith
Crist, “Guilded Tokens and New Techniques,” New York Herald Tribune, 31 May
1964, 21; “Lens Lines,” Camera 35 (June–July 1964); Irving Desfor (Associated
Press), “Imaginative Movies Fascinate Fairgoers,” Pomona Progress Bulletin, 21 June
1964.
68. “Kodak Pavilion a World’s Fair Success,” Kodak press release, 15 October
1965, http://www.nywf64.com/easkod10.shtml.

409

Notes to Pages 290–300
69. The logo later appeared on Kodak’s mid-1960s 16mm Pageant projectors. See
http://cdn.krrb.com/post_images/photos/000/104/824/P1120391_large
.jpg?1362076100.
70. See “Sol Lesser Signs Sandy Lane,” Box Office, 3 August 1964, production
files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
71. See Sohn, “The ‘Eyes’ Have It.”
72. According to an article published in September 1986, the film was “not yet in
theatrical release.” See “The Making of Quest,” Step-by-Step Graphics 2, no. 5 (September–October 1986): 36.
73. Interview with Herb Yager, 27 February 2013, Ojai, CA.
74. See “Saul Bass & Associates,” special issue, IDEA (1979). See also the statement by Saul and Elaine Bass in Marsha Jeffer and Pauline G. Weber, Study Guide to
Quest (Santa Monica, CA: Pyramid Films, 1985), 3.
75. Quoted on the M. Okada International Association website, http://www
.moainternational.or.jp/en/intro/intr01.html.
76. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 253.
77. “Production Budgets QUEST, Dated March 1981,” box 9A, file 4, Saul Bass
Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
78. Letter from Saul Bass to Ray Bradbury, 8 December 1980. Per a signed letter
of agreement dated 24 December 1980, Bradbury was paid $22,500 for the first and
final shooting scripts. See “Ray Bradbury,” box 7A, file 33, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
79. Quoted in Jeffer and Weber, Study Guide to Quest, 3.
80. In a letter to Takahiro Yamaguchi dated 24 July 1981, Saul Bass reported on
his preproduction work to church officials, noting that “adhering to our budget creates still more work—that is finding unique ways to achieve very costly effects at a
price we can afford, without a loss of quality.” See “Overseas Data Service,” box 8, file
27, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
81. Interview with Jeff Okun, 23 March 2012, Hollywood, CA.
82. Telex from Herb Yager to Takahiro Yamaguchi, 7 November 1983, “Quest
Film Festivals,” box 8A, file 6, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
83. See “Quest Film Festivals,” box 8A, file 6, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
84. The Pyramid print of Quest is available on YouTube in its entirety: http://
www.youtube.com/watch?v=Zcb-M5a4Uy8&feature=related.
85. Vladimir Propp, Morphology of the Folktale (Austin: University of Texas Press,
1968).
86. Paul Ricoeur, “Narrative Time,” Critical Inquiry 7, no. 1 (Autumn 1980): 184.
87. Jeffer and Weber, Study Guide to Quest, 3.
88. The falling rocks were slowed down by overcranking to as much as sixty-four
frames per second. See “The Making of Quest,” 46.
89. Bass inserted a similar game between a baboon and a child in shot 87 of the
deleted original ending for Phase IV. I’m grateful to Sean Savage for pointing this out
to me. E-mail from Sean Savage to the author, 15 March 2013.

410

Notes to Pages 301–312
90. Memo from Masa Miura to Dick Huppertz, 25 November 1981, “Overseas
Data Service,” box 8A, file 27, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
91. Ibid.
92. Jeffer and Weber, Study Guide to Quest, 4.
93. Ibid.
94. Carole Wade and Carol Tarvris, Psychology, 3rd ed. (New York: HarperCollins,
1993). The cover is reproduced in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 377.
95. Carole Cox, “Electric Media: New Short Films for the Humanities,” English
Journal 74, no. 7 (November 1985): 96.
96. See “The Making of Quest,” 40.
97. See the landscape drawing in ibid., 38.
98. Ricoeur, “Narrative Time,” 184.

7. Civilization: Organizing Knowledge through Communication
1. “Print Personality: Saul Bass,” Print 11, no. 6 (May–June 1958): 18.
2. See “Col Acquires ‘Cowboy’ from Horizon Pictures,” Daily Variety, 15 January 1953, 6; Mike Connolly, “Rambling Reporter,” Hollywood Reporter, 21 June
1954, 2.
3. See Los Angeles Times, July 1956, quoted in the American Film Institute catalog, http://www.afi.com/members/catalog/DetailView.aspx?s=&Movie=52509.
4. Dalton Trumbo’s writing credit was reinstated by the Writers Guild in 2000.
See Hollywood Reporter, 4 August 2000.
5. Jean-Louis Rieupeyrout, “Au pays du Western,” Cinéma 61, quoted in Will
Wehlig, ed., Delmar Daves (Oberhausen: Verlag Karl Maria Laufen, 1972), 101–2.
6. James Powers, “Cowboy,” Variety, 12 February 1958, 6; Bosley Crowther,
“Cowboy,” New York Times, 20 February 1958. See also “Thank You Note to Critics,”
Daily Variety, 13 March 1958, 7–11.
7. Derek Prouse, “Cowboy,” Monthly Film Bulletin 25, no. 290 (1958): 31.
8. See Newsweek, 17 February 1958, 106; Time, 17 February 1958, 64; New
Yorker, 1 March 1958, 107; Saturday Review, 1 March 1958, 26.
9. Stephen Harvey, Directed by Vincente Minnelli (New York: Museum of Modern Art/Harper and Row, 1989), 263.
10. “‘4 Horsemen’ Reins Handed Blaustein,” Daily Variety, 11 July 1958, 1.
11. Thomas Quinn Curtiss, “Four Horsemen to Ride Again,” New York Herald
Tribune Paris, 17 August 1960, Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse, production files,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
12. Harvey, Directed by Minnelli, 264.
13. See Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse trade advertisement in Daily Variety, 13
September 1961, 29. It uses the torn-paper design Bass would later use for Bunny
Lake Is Missing.
14. The montages survive in the Saul Bass Papers; see The Four Horsemen of the
Apocalypse, “Production Elements, Unused War Montages.” It has been argued that
Elaine and Saul spent months looking for World War II footage for The Victors, yet
Mike Lonzo, who worked on the Victors, has no memory of Elaine being around. In

411

Notes to Pages 312–320
fact, Elaine Bass may have been misremembering which film she worked on, having
pulled the material for Four Horsemen instead. See Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 210;
interview with Mike Lonzo, 19 September 2012; Mike Lonzo posting, 4 September 2007, http://www.filmscoremonthly.com/board/posts.cfm?threadID=44652&
forumID&.
15. Jean Douchet, “The Red and the Green: The Four Horsemen of the Apocalypse,” in Vincente Minnelli, ed. Joe McElhaney (Detroit: Wayne State University
Press, 2009), 42.
16. Existing footage from the actual speech shows a crowd made up exclusively of
uniformed Nazi storm troopers, while Hitler himself is seen only in long shot, neither
of which suited Bass’s purposes. See the newsreel excerpt at http://www.youtube
.com/watch?v=JI9fpBiRCMw.
17. See Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 210. The authors confirm that images from
San Francisco were used, but again, they suggest that the images were intended for
The Victors prologue, for which they were also used.
18. Ibid.
19. In the mid-1960s Bass was seemingly becoming a montage specialist, much as
Slavko Vorkapich had been in classical Hollywood. For example, it was announced
that he would do an opening prologue for George Roy Hill’s Hawaii (1966) and the
titles and special effects for Blake Edwards’s The Party (1968). See Army Archerd,
“Just for Variety,” Daily Variety, 15 February 1966, 2; “Ray, Wilson to Film ‘The
Alien’ for Col,” Daily Variety, 12 June 1967, 1.
20. “Carl Foreman Turns to Directing,” Daily Variety, 7 December 1960, 1, 4.
21. Bosley Crowther, “The Victors,” New York Times, 20 December 1963; Arthur
Knight, “The Victors,” Saturday Review, 14 December 1963, 24.
22. See Harrison Carroll, “Victors Grim Film,” Los Angeles Herald Examiner, 23
December 1963, B-4; Richard Gertner, “The Victors,” Motion Picture Herald, 27
November 1963; PGB, “The Victors,” Films & Filming, January 1964.
23. J. S., “The Victors Prologue by Saul Bass,” Cinema, February–March 1964.
24. According to Mike Lonzo: “I recall that we worked, off-and-on, nearly six
months on this prologue. As it exists now in the film, it is only about half its original
work print length. It was a very detailed visual essay on WWI, the aftermath, the rise
of the political postwar developments in Germany, the rise of Hitler, and the beginning of WWII—all of which led into the Main Title, and then, in effect, was the historical setup for the film.” Lonzo posting, 2007.
25. The storyboards for The Victors are reproduced in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass,
212–13.
26. “The Victors—Title Description,” box 13A, file 42, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
27. Unfortunately, the prints available in the Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film
Archive, AMPAS, are completely red, so it is impossible to tell what parts of the film
were in black and white and what parts were in color.
28. “How to Compare Apples and Oranges,” Broadcasting Magazine, 28 January
1963, 30.

412

Notes to Pages 321–327
29. Arthur Perles, “TV Sales-Muscle Kayos Mags,” Radio Television Daily, 28 January 1963, 1, 3.
30. “Apples and Oranges—Food for Thought. How CBS Sells a Concept,” Telefilm 8, no. 5 (May 1963): 30.
31. See the cover image in Dick Hess and Marion Muller, Dorfsman & CBS (New
York: American Showcase, 1987), 138. See also Radio Television Daily, 13 February
1963, 6–7. For a similar design concept, see General Control Company advertisement
(1956) in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 51.
32. Perles, “TV Sales-Muscle Kayos Mags,” 3. The shooting was handled by Format Films, according to this source. See also “How to Compare Apples and Oranges,”
34.
33. “How to Compare Apples and Oranges,” 31.
34. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 77, 156–57.
35. “Apples and Oranges—Food for Thought,” 31.
36. Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 47.
37. The computer punch-hole design would appear as early as 1957 in Bass’s posters
and titles for Edge of the City and in a report for the California Test Bureau (1957).
However, the design is most obvious in two infomercials made for IBM in 1962, “The
History of Invention” and “Cancer Research.” See Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 80, 97.
38. Bass had used a coat-wearing figure exposing himself for an advertisement for
KLH Research and Development in 1957. See Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 77.
39. “AT&T, One Hundred Years of the Telephone,” box 44A, files 10, 15, 19,
Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
40. “Pantomime Pictures Inc. Tentative Production Schedule 100 Years of the Telephone,” box 44A , file 18, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
41. “100 Years Film Festivals,” box 44A, file 42, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS; Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 102, 408. These sources give two
different dates: 1976 and 1977.
42. In fact, Peary claimed that he reached the North Pole in 1909, but Amundsen
did not reach the South Pole until 1911.
43. The Academy Film Archive has now fully restored the film, as previous prints
were badly faded. The unrestored version is still being distributed by Pyramid Films
and can be seen at https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=euh0kEU20V4.
44. Jason Woloski, “Why Man Creates,” http://notcoming.com/reviews/
whymancreates/.
45. The same year Bass produced Why Man Creates, IBM financed its own film
about creativity and human endeavor, Transformations. Produced and directed by
Ralph Sargent, later the owner of Film Technology Inc., the seventeen-minute film
was recently screened at “The Real Indies: A Closer Look at Orphan Films” at the
Academy Film Archive.
46. “Print Personality: Saul Bass,” Print 11, no. 6 (May–June 1958): 17. See also
“Pros & Cons on TV Conformity,” Variety, 30 September 1959, 31.
47. Saul Bass, “A Definition of Creativity,” Design: The Magazine of Creative Art
60 (March–April 1959): 144.

413

Notes to Pages 327–331
48. Quoted in Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 382.
49. Saul Bass, “Thoughts on Design. An Oration,” Journal of the Royal Society for
the Encouragement of Arts 113, no. 5112 (November 1965): 992.
50. Shirley Smith, “PR Films Coming or Going?” Business Screen 31, no. 5 (May
1970): 34.
51. Morgenstern, “Saul Bass,” 65. Morgenstern is apparently paraphrasing an
unidentified manuscript in the Bass Papers, thought to be a seminar for AT&T marketing executives in 1988. Thanks to Sean Savage for making this document available
to me.
52. Letter from Saul Bass to William Riley (Young & Rubicam), 30 September
1966, “Why Man Creates Y + R Previews #21,” box 15A, file 5, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
53. See “Why Man Creates Script #1,” box 14A, file 30, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS. The file contains more than thirty unnumbered and mostly
undated sheets of paper with handwritten notes. One, on Saul Bass & Associates letterhead and dated 2 October 1967, contains more than thirty suggested titles for the
film, including Why Man Creates.
54. See letter from Robert A. Sandberg (Kaiser) to SB, 10 December 1970 (which
mentions the original contract agreement date), “Why Man Creates Legal,” box 14A,
file 53, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
55. Memo from Don Fabun (Kaiser Aluminum News) to SB, 13 February 1967,
“Why Man Creates Script #1,” box 14A, file 30, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
56. Although Erik Daarstad is credited as cinematographer, some slates on outtakes indicate that Laszlo Kovacs also shot footage for Bass. See e-mail from Sean Savage to the author, 15 March 2013.
57. “Why Man Creates—Storyboards, Presented to Kaiser,” box 14A, file 50, Saul
Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
58. This outline is dated 20 November 1967. See “Why Man Creates Early Notes,”
box 14A, file 32, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. The final script
by Mayo Simon and Saul Bass is dated February 1968 and corresponds to this version,
but according to Bass’s handwritten note on the script from 14 July 1975, “Final
changes after film shoot may never have been incorporated in an actual updated script
version.” See “Why Man Creates Final Script,” box 14A, file 37, Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
59. Interview with James Hollander, 31 October 2012, Burbank, CA.
60. “Kaiser Film Wins Plaudits (and $s),” California Business, n.d. [March 1969?],
“Why Man Creates Press Clippings,” box 14A, file 44, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
61. Why Man Creates, alternative version, 16mm color reversal positive, 82654-11, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive, AMPAS.
62. See “Why Man Creates Y + R Previews #21,” box 15A, file 5, Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
63. Morgenstern, “Saul Bass,” 66.

414

Notes to Pages 331–332
64. Memo from Hugh Morris to Robert Sandberg, 26 February 1968, “Why Man
Creates Y + R Previews #21,” box 15A, file 5, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
65. See Why Man Creates brochure, “Why Man Creates Programs,” box 14A, file
59, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
66. See press release, Laemmle Theatre, 23 August 1968. See also Richard Whitehall, “The Film Scene,” Open City, 6–12 September 1968, “Why Man Creates
Reviews,” box 14A, file 44, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
67. See Joe Broady, “Sugar Coated Blurb Pix Big Biz,” Daily Variety, 28 October
1969, 150.
68. The edifice sequence was subsequently broadcast on 8 July 1970 on the Smothers’ Brothers Summer Show. See “Television Review,” Daily Variety, 9 July 1970, 7;
“Smothers Brothers Summer Show,” Women’s Wear Daily, 10 July 1970, clipping, “Why
Man Creates Reviews,” box 15A, file 1, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
69. See Business Screen 30, no. 7 (July 1969): 500. “Kaiser Film Wins Plaudits (and
$s)” notes that, after the film’s Oscar win, Modern Talking Pictures produced 500
new prints.
70. Yaffa Draznin and Hugh Marsh, “Movie Provokes Opposing Views,” Los
Angeles Technograph 10, no. 4 (March–April 1969): 5.
71. [Beverly Jeanne Davis], Review of Why Man Creates, Art Education Magazine,
October 1969, 49.
72. See David A. Sohn, “See How They Run,” Film News 26, no. 5 (October
1969): 20–21; David A. Sohn, “The Eye of the Observer: Films to Make You See,”
Science Activities, January 1970, 10–12.
73. Jason Woloski, “Why Man Creates,” http://www.notcoming.com/reviews/
whymancreates/.
74. See letter from Robert A. Sandberg to SB, 10 December 1970; memo from
Morrie Marsh to SB, 15 December 1970, “Why Man Creates Legal,” box 14A, file 53,
Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. Marsh writes that Kaiser’s public
relations firm would have distributed the film for free forever, regardless of the
$225,000 it invested.
75. The Pyramid agreement was signed on 1 July 1969. See letter from Sandberg
to SB, 8 November 1971, “Why Man Creates Legal,” box 14A, file 53, Saul Bass
Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
76. “Bass Moneymaker,” Hollywood Reporter, 21 November 1977, 11.
77. See letter from Ainsworth (Pyramid) to Morrie Marsh, 11 May 1972, “Why
Man Creates Legal,” box 14A, file 53, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS. The letter included a royalty check for $37,296.65, which amounted to 25
percent of Pyramid’s income ($149,186) for the period 1969–1971. See also Ainsworth (Pyramid) to Morrie Marsh, 14 February 1973, “Why Man Creates Rentals,”
box 15A, file 2, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. This letter
included a check for $9,850.43 for the fourth quarter of 1972. Later earning statements indicated the following: $8,4440.93 for fourth-quarter 1975; $10,118.41 for

415

Notes to Pages 333–343
first-quarter 1976; $10,456.75 for second-quarter 1976; $8,426.60 for third-quarter
1976; $9,399.90 for fourth-quarter 1976; and $6,989.77 for first-quarter 1977.
78. See Morgenstern, “Saul Bass,” 64; AT&T seminar manuscript, 1988, Saul
Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
79. The note with the typed titles is dated October 1967 and is on Saul Bass &
Associates letterhead. See “Why Man Creates Script #1,” box 14A, file 30, Saul Bass
Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
80. AT&T seminar manuscript, 1988, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
81. Saul Bass had designed the corporate logo for Warner Brothers, which Herb
Yager characterized as DOA because it put the W in a television frame, just as the company was transitioning to a transmedia conglomerate and changing its name from
National Kinney Corporation to Warner Communications. Yager thought Bass just
wasn’t paying attention when he designed the logo. Nevertheless, Bass apparently
went to the head of National Kinney Corporation and suggested a film that would
demonstrate to Wall Street that the diverse entertainment businesses now at the company’s center all fit together. Interview with Herb Yager, 27 February 2013, Ojai, CA.
82. Significantly, Bass used the same introduction for Notes on the Popular Arts,
but with disembodied hands typing on a typewriter. This less personal approach was
more in keeping with that film’s commercial goals.
83. Roh and Tschichold, Foto-Auge, Photo-Eye, Oeil et Photo, cover.
84. The first edit, shown in February 1968, also included Frank Lloyd Wright in
the mix. Sean Savage informs me that there are also outtakes of old-time portraits of
“Saul as Old Creator,” indicating that Bass considered placing himself in the pantheon. E-mail from Sean Savage to the author, 15 March 2013.
85. This is confirmed by a photocopy of an article about the Chicago Picasso controversy in the Bass Papers. See D. J. R. Bruckner, “Chicago Unveils, Hails Its Puzzling, 50 Ft. Picasso,” New York Times, n.d., “Why Man Creates Script #1,” box 14A,
file 30, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
86. Irving Howe, Literary Modernism (Greenwich, CT: Fawcett Publishers,
1967), 24.
87. Dr. Dulbecco would eventually win a Nobel Prize for his work in medicine in
1975. See http://articles.latimes.com/2012/feb/21/local/la-me-renato-dulbecco-20120221.
88. This final sequence is named “The Mark” in previous iterations of the script
and cutting continuity, and it refers to humanity’s take on nature.
89. The three sequences are the jumping-jacks scene in traffic, the social worker
scene with a cascade of numbers, and the brain surgery scene. Later in the AT&T film
he uses a short version of the Hitler montage from The Victors. See AT&T Corporate
Program (1969), 16mm print, 1499-1, Saul Bass Collection, Academy Film Archive,
AMPAS. The Academy calls the film A New Look for the Bell System; there is no title on
the original film.
90. According to Paramount distribution reports from 1985, the film’s overall
shortfall was $372,622, after subtracting income from expenses. However, there was
apparently a lot of “creative accounting” on Paramount’s side, since it sold the film to

416

Notes to Pages 343–344
television in November 1975 for $1.1 million, when the balance was $1.6 million in
the red; a month later, the balance remained at $1.6 million. See Paramount Financial
Reports #1 (2 December 1974), #5 (20 December 1975), #20 (31 August 1985),
“Phase IV Distribution Reports,” box 5A, file 28, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
91. Nic Francis, “Bass PHASE IV,” Screen ’n’ Heard, March 1973, 11.
92. See “Phase II for Par,” Variety, 22 September 1971, 2; “Saul Bass Will Direct
‘Phase II’ for Paramount,” Hollywood Reporter, 22 September 1971, 1. Simon
received $10,000 for his script, but he complained in a letter to the editor of the Los
Angeles Times that his role had been ignored in an article on the making of the film.
See letter to the editor, Los Angeles Times, 17 March 1973, clipping in Phase IV production files, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. See also letter from Ben Margolis to
Morrie Marsh, 30 November 1972, and letter from Eric Weissmann (Law Offices of
Kaplan, Livingston, Godwin, Berkwitz & Stein) to Eugene Frank (Paramount), 28
June 1972, “Phase IV Legal,” box 6A, file 2, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS.
93. Hollander interview, 2012. See also Bell, “Oral History with Saul Bass.”
94. A. H. Weiler, “Bass’s Bugs,” New York Times, 30 June 1972. The final shooting script, dated 3 September 1972, consisted of 106 pages of dialogue and 544 shots.
See “Phase IV Script,” box 5A, file 21, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library,
AMPAS.
95. “Phase IV Will Roll in London for Par,” Hollywood Reporter, 19 July 1972, 4.
96. See “Phase IV Storyboards,” box 6A, file 22, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS; interviews with Jeff Okun, 6 June 2011, Studio City, CA, and
23 March 2012, Hollywood, CA.
97. See “Film Prod. Pulse,” Variety, 15 November 1972, 34. This chronology is
based on an article stating that Bass left London in late November 1973, after thirteen
months behind the camera and in the editing room. See Philip Oakes, “Coming On:
Bass Note,” Sunday Times, 9 December 1973, 36.
98. MPAA news release, 22 January 1974, Phase IV production files, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
99. Letter from Saul Bass and Paul Radin to Charles Glenn, VP Advertising Publicity & Promotion, 20 September 1973, “Phase IV Publicity,” box 6A, file 14, Saul
Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
100. Three months after completing the film, Bass wrote: “All goes well on PHASE
IV and distribution plans are proceeding apace—having been held up by the problems
created at Technicolor by your state of crisis. . . . Our economy is fairly rocky—and this
makes for cautious attitudes in business circles, having its inevitable effect on all of us.”
Letter from Saul Bass to Arnold Schwartzman, 21 February 1974. On 18 April Bass
wrote to Radin: “Still don’t have a release date.” Then again on 7 June: “The picture’s
in Yablans’ hands. Evans considers it his (Yablans’) baby now. I am awaiting word as
to his intentions about the release date and a release plan.” On 1 October Radin wrote
to Bass: “If the picture hasn’t in fact opened anywhere, do you think they will ever
release it? I cannot believe it is that bad.” Finally, in a letter to Radin on 28 October,

417

Notes to Pages 344–345
Bass confessed: “Phase IV opened in forty theatres in New York (and is apparently not
doing too well). I have not talked to Paramount; I have given up on that completely.”
All the letters are in “Phase IV Correspondence,” box 5A, file 27, Saul Bass Papers,
Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
101. New York City preview, 12 August 1974, “Phase IV Previews,” box 6A, file 1,
Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
102. Kevin Thomas, “Phase IV,” Los Angeles Times, 13 June 1975, pt. IV, 15.
103. See letter from Saul Bass to Paul Radin, 1 September 1974; Bass’s aidemémoire about a meeting with Yablans and Glenn, attached to Telefax from Saul Bass
to Frank Yablans, 10 October 1974; letter from SB to Barry Day, McCann-Erickson
Advertising Ltd., London, 11 November 1974, all in “Phase IV Correspondence,”
box 5A, file 27, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS. As Bass noted in
the letter to Day regarding the film’s publicity: “I am pleased you liked it and can only
hasten to assure you that I had nothing to do with the posters or the ad campaign generally (although there were a lot of battles between Paramount New York and me).”
104. Bass’s friends wrote: “Some people at the theatre stopped Leon to ask him if
you were an Englishman because the picture had a foreign feeling!” Letter from Julia
and Leon Winston to Saul Bass, 27 January 1974: “Phase IV Correspondence,” box
5A, file 27, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick Library, AMPAS.
105. For many years, the ending montage sequence was believed to have never been
made, but it turned up in the Bass Collection at the Academy Film Archive. According to Jeff Okun, the sequence is not the original; rather, Okun re-created it in 16mm
in the late 1970s. However, Sean Savage, the Academy’s Bass archivist, questions the
veracity of Okun’s statement, given that Paramount’s separation masters of Phase IV
have the montage intact. See Bass and Kirkham, Saul Bass, 257; Okun interview,
2012; e-mail from Sean Savage to the author, 15 March 2013.
106. “Phase IV,” Box Office, 16 September 1974.
107. See “Phase IV,” Motion Picture Production Digest, 18 September 1974; “Phase
IV,” Audience 75 (September 1974): 15; John Dorr, “Phase IV,” Hollywood Reporter,
2 October 1974, 8; William Wolf, “Phase IV,” Cue, 28 October–3 November 1974;
“Phase IV,” Seventeen 33, no. 11 (November 1974); “Phase IV,” Playboy 21, no. 12
(December 1974); J. R., “Phase IV,” Oui 4, no. 1 (January 1975).
108. Jay Cocks, “Phase IV,” Time, 14 October 1974, 10–11.
109. Har., “Phase IV,” Variety, 9 October 1974, 18. See also Frank Rich, “Phase
IV,” New York Times, 4 October 1974; Robert C. Cumbow, “Phase IV,” Movietone
News 37 (November 1974): 31–32.
110. Thomas, “Phase IV,” 15.
111. Nigel Andrews, “Ant Action,” Financial Times, 18 October 1974. See also
Jonathan Rosenbaum, “Phase IV,” Monthly Film Bulletin 41, no. 489 (October
1974): 228.
112. A sign of the film’s growing critical status is its inclusion in a new film series at
the Los Angeles County Museum of Art, “Beyond the Infinite: Science Fiction after
Kubrick.” See https://www.lacma.org/series/beyond-infinite-science-fiction-afterkubrick.

418

Notes to Pages 345–351
113. Graham J. Murphy, “Phase IV,” Science Fiction Film and Television 3, no. 2
(Autumn 2010). See also Thomas Scalzo, “Phase IV,” Not Coming to a Theatre Near
You, http://notcoming.com/reviews/phase4/; “Phase IV—A Film by Saul Bass,”
The Hauntological Society, http://thehauntologicalsociety.blogspot.com/search?
updated-min=2011-01-01T00:00:00Z&updated-max=2012-0101T00:00:00Z&max-results=50. Numerous other reviews of the film on DVD can be
found on the Internet Movie Database, http://www.imdb.com/title/tt0070531/
externalreviews.
114. In retrospect, Bass commented on his experience with Phase IV: “I think Phase
IV was an interesting but not entirely successful film. Still as a life experience, it was
absolutely extraordinary. On the one hand full of anxiety, frustration and even despair.
On the other hand, exhilarating and energizing. Talk about life on the edge! Even
when it drives you nuts, you are stimulated and engaged. Until then all my work had
been relatively short forms: titles, sequences, short films. Long forms are another kind
of creative experience. They represent a different sort of creative problem, qualitatively
as well as quantitatively. Especially when you have never done it before.” Krag and
Volsted, Title Sequence Seminar, 20–21.
115. Vivian Sobchack, Screening Space: The American Science Fiction Film (New
York: Ungar Publishing, 1987), 88.
116. Ibid., 112.
117. Beier and Midding, Vorspann: Zum Werk von Saul Bass.
118. See “Phase IV drawings,” box 5A, file 29, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret Herrick
Library, AMPAS. According to Sean Savage (personal communication, 25 January
2013), the role of Kendra was reduced because Lynne Frederick’s performance was
stilted and because Paramount executives were worried there might be some inappropriate sexual chemistry between the underage Frederick and Murphy.
119. This shot, particularly its soundscape of an abstract buzzing noise, immediately
recalls the alien slabs at the beginning of 2001.
120. Bass described the toxic yellow desert as a “strangely threatening, but strangely
beautiful landscape.” See American Film Institute Seminar, 32.
121. Quoted in Philip Oakes, “Coming On: Bass Note,” Sunday Times, 9 December 1973, 36.
122. Memo from Louis Dorfsman (CBS Broadcast Group) to Saul Bass, 10 December 1974, “Phase IV Correspondence,” box 5A, file 27, Saul Bass Papers, Margaret
Herrick Library, AMPAS.
123. See John Brosnan, Future Tense: The Cinema of Science Fiction (New York: St.
Martin’s Press, 1978), 228. Brosnan argues that Phase IV tries too hard to emulate
2001, but he only had access to the abbreviated ending, “with the two humans being
transformed, either by the ants or by the intelligence guiding them, into a new form
of life.”
124. Bass apparently lost the original ending, and Jeff Okun claims he re-created it
for demonstration purposes. Okun interview, 2012. However, Sean Savage from the
Academy Film Archive found the original ending at Paramount and has begun showing the film with that ending.
